first 20, 23 regular meeting of
the municipal transportation
agency board of directors and
parking authority commission.
Good afternoon, directors,
staff, members of the public. If
we could please find our seats.
We thank you for joining us.
This meeting is being held in
hybrid format, occurring in
person at city hall, room 400
broadcast live on govtv and by
phone. The phone number to use.
Is (415) 655-0001. Access. Code
26612592554. When the item is
called dial star three to enter
the queue, commenters will have
up to two minutes to provide
comment unless otherwise noted
by the chair. Please speak
clearly and sure you're in a
quiet location and turn off any
tvs or computers around you.
Also note that a time limit of
ten minutes of remote public
comment on each action or
discussion item has been set.
And notice for this meeting, we
thank you for your cooperation
in places you on item number two
roll call director heminger here
heminger present director
henderson here. Henderson.
Present director hinsey present.
Kinsey present chair eakin here
eakin. Present. We are expecting
director. So and kahina for the
record, I note that director
hinsey is attending this meeting
remotely. Director hinsey is
reminded that she must appear on
camera throughout the meeting
and in order to speak or vote on
any items pleases you. On item
number three, the ringing and
use of cell phones and similar
sound producing electronic
devices are prohibited at this
meeting, the chair MAY order the
removal from the meeting room of
any person responsible for the
ringing or use of a cell phone
or other or other similar sound
producing electronic devices,
places you on. Item number four,
the approval of minutes for the
NOVEMBER seven regular meeting
directors. There is one
correction I'd like to make to
page three under item 10.2. The
minutes state that item 10.1 a
was removed from the consent
calendar and that should instead
read that item. 10.2 a was
removed not 10.1 a thank you.
Thank you for that change.
Directors, are there any other
changes to the NOVEMBER 7th
minutes? Seeing none, I'll open
public comment for anyone
attending the meeting in person
on the NOVEMBER 7th minutes and
seeing none. Please open a
remote at this time. We'll move
to remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should star
three to enter the queue. Each
speaker will have two minutes.
No speakers. Okay, we'll close
public comment is there a motion
and a second? Please move as
amended. Seconded by our
secretary. Yes. Thank you.
Please call the roll on the
motion to approve the minutes
with correction director
heminger heminger director
henderson. Henderson. I director
hinsey. Hi hinsey. I jeremy
corbyn. Hi, egan. I thank you.
The minutes are approved and
places you on. Item number five
communications. I have none.
Moving on to item number six
introduction of new or
unfinished business by board
members. Okay director
hemminger, please. Thank you,
MADAM Chair. Colleagues you MAY
have seen in the papers as I did
that according to one report, at
least at this agency is owed
$200 million in unpaid parking
revenue, which is a lot of dough
. It's about a year's worth of
fare revenue pre-pandemic. And I
know you can't treat all of
that. $200 million in one lump,
but I think it would be helpful
for the staff to develop some
kind of recovery plan. So that
we could repatriate as much of
that money. What for what it's
intended for, which is to help
subsidize our immune system,
among other things. And I think
it would be important.
Apparently the newspaper report
only went back a few years to go
back as far as we can recover
the revenue and also to look at
other sources of revenue that we
MAY be owed. And I think it
would be a healthy exercise to
include those numbers as well.
They probably won't approach the
level for parking fines and
fees, but every little bit
helps. So that would be my
request for that plan to be
developed and for it to be
presented to this board as soon
as we can muster the effort.
Thank you. Director hemminger
director tomlin, is there
anything you want to say about
that right now? No. We'll be
happy to have staff put together
either a memo or a presentation,
whichever is the board's
pleasure. Thank you. Any other
items of new or unfinished
business? Okay. If no more. I do
have one item which was noticed
on our agenda, and this is just
to let you all know, colleagues,
members of the public, that as
we have noticed, the board will
be sunsetting remote public
comment effective JANUARY 1st,
2024. This change is at the
direction of the mayor's office
for all boards and commissions
citywide. It's intended to
ensure a uniform public comment
policy. Consistent with that
which has been adopted by the
board of supervisors. It is also
intended to avoid the type of
disruptive issues that gave rise
to the board of supervisors
policy in the first place. I
know for the community that
loves to comment at these
meetings and I know some of you
will not be happy with this
decision. So I just want to
remind you of all of the options
available to you to share your
opinion with the board. You MAY
always write your comment in
advance of the meeting and I
will encourage the further in
advance of the meeting, the more
guarantee that the board will
see the comment in advance of
the meeting. This board is very
committed to reading the public
comment letters that we receive.
So that is a very effective way
to get your opinion across. I
believe secretary silva, members
of the public can also call in
and leave a voicemail that will
be transmitted to the board. So
that's also an option that you
have in advance of the meeting.
You MAY, of course, continue to
attend the board meeting in
person in this room to provide
public comment and I want to
also let you all know that
especially for those of you who
will be desiring to continue
remote public comment, I as
chair, I'm going to be exploring
offering virtual office hours in
advance of the meeting starting
in JANUARY. So that's an
opportunity additionally for you
to share your views directly
with me. We're still working out
some of the logistical details,
but that information will be
posted online soon. And then
finally, that accommodation for
remote public comment will
continue to be made available
for those with disabilities
needing accomp adoption and
information about requesting
that disability accommodation
can be found on our agendas or
by reaching out to the board.
Secretary, secretary silva. So
we look forward to seeing
everyone in person and
continuing to hear from you
colleagues. Any comments or
questions on that item before I
go to public comment. Okay.
Please open. Let's invite public
comment from anyone in the room.
I do have one speaker card.
Richard rothman. Good afternoon,
commissioners. My name is
richard rothman and I just I
don't think all commissioners
are following this directive,
but it's just really a
discrimination against people,
people who have mobility issues
and seniors and people who live
out in the in the district. And
why can't this, you know, I've
been following this commission
for a very long time and why
can't this commission have
meetings in the neighborhood?
Three of the commissioners live
in the richmond district. They
could have it at the richmond
rec center and or over in the
sunset. You know, so especially
like when we're talking about
the bus lines, the 28 and the
20, was it 28 and the 29 and
gary, you know, they could have
had public comment, public
public meetings out in the
neighborhood and have them at
night. I can't see why staff
can't come out to the richmond.
Maybe they'll know. They'll
explore something new in the
city they haven't seen before.
So I really hope, you know, we
can get this mayor's directive,
but, you know, think of having
an alternative. I like the idea
of having virtual meetings, but
maybe have the meetings out in
the community and have the
meetings at night. You know, a
lot of people work out during
the day or have child care and
hard to come to the meetings. So
maybe have options of having
some kind of alternative
meetings. Thank you. Thank you
for your comment. Are there
other commenters in the room? Go
ahead, please. Hello hello. My
name is chaya french. I live in
san francisco and I'm the
transit organizing director at
senior and disability action.
And yeah, I appreciate that. It
sounds like this is not the
position that you all might have
chosen and that it's getting
carried down from the board of
supervisors. But I would ask you
to use whatever you can in your
power to give feedback to the
board of supervisors that this
is not a position that really
works for this board. I don't
think it really works for san
francisco government in general.
I think we I think some of the
importance of remote public
comment is in giving a public
forum. So that all of us can
hear what the community is
thinking. And I appreciate the
what you just laid out, but that
doesn't let the community know
sort of what the conversation is
and that we're particularly
concerned because we are in
partnership with many
organizations and community
members and communities like
parents, working class people,
all people who can't make it to
parts of the city, people who
might have of physical
limitations, but yet don't want
to identify themselves publicly
as disabled, and that there are
so many important things that
come before this board. And we
really want our whole community
to be able to weigh in. Thank
you. Thank you for your comment.
Next speaker, please. Good
afternoon, commissioners. My
name is ty bash. I was actually
wasn't going to give public
comment, but since we're talking
about this item, the ada
wheelchair accessible entrance
on the east part of this
building has been out of service
for I don't know how long. Eight
months ago, I was in this
building and I reached out to
the individuals who are taking
care of maintenance, and they
promised me that this will be
taken care of expeditiously. I
was here today. It's still
broken. Not only that part of
the original assembly removed
the. The handrail, which means
that in order to come in through
security, people need to crawl
down on all fours to go up the
stairs and I don't think that's
that's dignifying perhaps it's
you could delay remote access
until some of these things are
fixed so people can come over to
this building and actually
provide public comment. Thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker,
please. Hi. Board members. Luke
bornheimer. I will admit that I
am very torn on this. This item
and this change. As you all
know, I organize a lot of people
around car for jfk and great
highway and slow streets to make
comment and many of those people
were able to engage because they
were able to engage remotely,
whether it was at night because
they had a kid at home or just
they had never engaged in the
process at all. And people like
me made it really easy for them
to engage in the process. I also
recognize that at many of the
equity issues and access issues
with remote public comment are
the same with in-person comment.
It's still hard for people to
learn about meetings. It's still
hard for them to engage. So I
encourage you all the mayor's
office to figure out ways that
increase access, increase
awareness for the public, and
for people to engage in an
equitable fashion. You know,
someone mentioned the public
comments that are sent in and
the ability for people or spoken
for people to hear what other
people are saying. And so I
think something that could be
really great is for all
commissions in the city to be
releasing public comments that
are emailed so that anyone can
see what is sent to a commission
or a board without having to a
sunshine request that would
allow people I mean, that's just
good governance. That's just
good transparency for the public
to see what's being said to
boards and commissions. So yeah,
very torn on this. Obviously
this is coming down from the
top, from the mayor's office. So
yeah, I don't know what the best
solution is here, but certainly
other cities, other countries
have figured out solutions that
are more equitable and increase
access without you know, bogging
down meetings and hours and
hours of public comment that
people like me organize. So
thanks for your consideration.
Thank you. Any other speakers in
the room? Okay if not, please
open a remote. Secretary silva.
At this time, we'll move to
remote public comment. Not a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should dial star three
to enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
for speaker. Hello, board
members, I'm dylan papers, the
community and policy manager at
san francisco transit riders. We
were disappointed to hear about
the decision to end remote
public comment. Our remote
public comment offers an
accessible option for folks who
are unable to attend each
meeting in person, whether it be
for disability reasons or child
care reasons or work
obligations, or just for the
reason that I'm calling it
today, which is I'm out of town
but still want to be able to
speak up publicly at these
meetings. A lot of transit
riders are are not necessarily
able to take time out of their
day to come down to city hall in
person and remote public comment
has given them a lot more
opportunity to speak up about
the things that impact them. We
know that public transit is
going to be a big part of
meeting a lot of our equity and
climate goals in the city and
it's crucial to hear from the
people riding transit at sfmta
board meetings, whether or not
they're able to get there in
person. It sounds like there is
maybe some hesitancy from this
board to implement this policy.
So I hope you all can reconsider
and push back on the mayor's
office's request. I do really
appreciate the idea of virtual
office hours and hope we can see
each board member adopt that
practice as well. I think that
could be a good way of getting
more of that direct feedback
from riders. Thank you all for
your consideration and I hope
you can reconsider and push back
on the policy. Thank you. Next
speaker. Herbert weiner. Now I
am living in assisted living. It
prohibits me from attending the
meetings in person at and I
think that the remote comment
for me is precious. On the other
hand, all means of access should
be available for feedback back,
especially at this time. The
muni proclaims it has serious
problems with providing services
, so you need input from all
sides in all ways. Now now the
reason why this prohibition has
gone through is, is there's been
hateful speech which we all
abhor in our right minds simply
cutting off the speaker is the
way to do it that way. There is
no problem. Someone says
something despicable. You would
immediately discontinue him from
speaking and you can do that by
cutting off the microphone,
phone and cutting off the remote
access to that party. It's as
simple as that. So so I suggest
you convey the sentiment to the
mayor and also to the board of
supervisors. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Next speaker.
Jerry cannon directors. My name
is evan arabic and I'm the
advocacy manager at walk san
francisco, allowing remote
public comment is an equity
issue, but it is also a good
governance issue for many san
franciscans coming to city hall
on a tuesday afternoon for
potentially several hours is a
tremendous challenge and often
simply impossible. We have jobs,
kids, transportation limitations
and physical disabilities.
Allowing remote public comment
means more people can at least
have the chance to have their
voice heard, and that can and
that more can imagine juggling
responsibility in such a way
that they can contribute to the
discussion even without remote
public comment, more people will
be shut out of the conversation.
And that's indisputable. That's
not only concerning from an
equity lens. It should be
understood as a threat to good
governance. When more voices are
heard, decision making is better
informed and therefore
potentially more effective. The
public needs us and our
constituents and members of the
vision zero coalition will
continue to raise our voices
through in-person public comment
, sending in letters and also
showing up to speak because
lives are on the line. And this
commission needs to hear from
people. Thank you. Thank you. No
additional callers. Okay. We
will close public comment.
Director hemminger, do you want
to speak again on this? Yes.
Just briefly, first of all, to
compliment you, MADAM Chair, for
I kind of liked your your hybrid
model for remote comment, so I'm
going to be sorry to see it go.
So secondly, I certainly want to
endorse the idea of having all
of our future meetings in the
richmond district. But
seriously, on that point, I
don't know whether this board
has a history of taking the show
on the road, but that is one
way, I think, to interact with
the community in a new fashion
in it's a lot of work and I'm
especially looking at our
commission secretary, but I
think from time to time that
might be something we ought to
consider doing. Thank you. Thank
you. Any other comments from my
colleagues? Okay DR. Karina, I
just wanted to double click on
that. I think that would be a
wonderful practice to have. I
believe rec and park conducts
their meetings in that way. They
go to different rec and park
sites and that's where they have
they host some of their
committee meetings. And so I
think it's there's a precedent
for it for sure. It is extra
work for christine. And so I'm
curious to see what that looks
like. But I think that that
would be a wonderful compromise
to see how we can meet folks
where they're at for sure.
Great. So I'm just going to go
ahead and read the numbers
again. It's in the printed
agenda, but if you want to call
in and leave a voicemail or
request accommodation, it's
(415) 646-4470 or email mta
board at sfmta.Com. And I will
say I'm also intrigued by the
idea of having our meetings
rotate around to different parts
of the city. I recognize it's
more work. Director tomlin is
glaring at me and the california
transportation commission rotate
their meetings all over the
state of california to give
exposure to different parts of
the state. So I think it's
something we should at least
explore and look into you as
well as I'm sympathetic to the
comment about the time of this
meeting at 1:00, and I know some
other commissions change the
times of their meetings. So
these are all creative solutions
and I thank members of the
public for trying to think
creatively about how we can
adapt to this new guidance and
still provide meaningful
opportunity for public
engagement and specifically
remotely. Let's move on to the
next item, please places you on
item number seven, the
director's report. Thank you,
christina and members of the
board. My first item is
bittersweet. I want to recognize
sfmta government affairs
director kate breen. Upon the
announcement of her retirement.
But kate will be retiring from
city government on DECEMBER
19th. Kate, do you want to come
up while I flatter you about
your extraordinary
accomplishments. Kate began I
don't even know if this is the
beginning of your transportation
career, but no, I believe. No,
no, no, no, no, no. But but
kate, before joining the sfmta
has spent 11 years at the
metropolitan transportation
commission where she was
instrumental among many things
in helping to ensure the passage
of the intermodal surface
transport efficiency act of
1991, an. Sounds like a long
time ago after 11 years at mtc,
she joined the sfmta, where she
has been for 22 two years. That
is dedicated in to public
service and she has had really
extraordinary accomplishments
here. Obviously, her
accomplishments as none of them
are a result of her alone in
fact, one of the things that is
so amazing about kate is the way
she forms teams, including the
extraordinary team, all of whom
are here today, including some
who have come back from leave
just for this event. But kate
has formed teams in order to
accomplish all kinds of
extraordinary legislation,
everything from really your
first accomplishment at the
sfmta, which was helping to
ensure funding for the central
subway project, in part by
establish ing the groundbreaking
principle that allowed san
francisco's contribution local
contribution on the surface
component of the t third line to
count as the local contribution
for federal funding for the
subway portion of that line. A
principle that has been used
again by the transbay joint
powers authority for helping to
fund the for the portal project.
The downtown rail extension
project. She is also helped get
past that ab 101, which
established the first trans it
only lane enforcement
demonstration program in the
state and then got that
continued something that we rely
upon today in order to enforce
our our transit lanes through
cameras and she has, among other
things, been for 12 years
working very, very hard on
vision zero policy at the state,
notably helping to pass ab 43
assembly member friedman's bill
that gave san francisco the
authority to lower speed limits.
And really one of I mean,
probably the crowning
achievement, which is after 12
years of trying every single
year at the state legislature,
legislature helping to get past
friedman's ab 645, which
authorized finally speed safety
cameras in california. She's
also, in addition to leading
here locally and at the regional
level, she has helped to uplift
her counterparts all over the
state of california. She has
been chair of the executive
committee at the california
transit association and was one
of the key people who helped
form the california city
transportation initiative, which
is a coalition of the eight
largest cities in california. I
am going to MISS Kate's wise
counsel and hard work dearly and
the only consolation that we
have upon her departure is the
extra ordinary team that she has
created who are ready to step up
in order to ensure a seamless
transition. Kate, would you like
to say anything? I mean, amazing
. Thank you, jeff, for those
amazing kind words, each of
those things that you cited were
such battles of their own. And
of course, none of these things
are accomplished alone, as jeff
mentioned. But also, if you look
behind who was leading on those,
it's san francisco legislators,
right? Assembly member david
chiu, even when he was a
supervisor for assemblywoman
fiona ma, senator scott wiener,
all of these have been champions
and many before them. I just
naming a couple and so the
alignment and the commitment of
our delegation over the years
has really made all of these
successes possible for this
agency and for the city. And of
course, congresswoman speaker
emerita nancy pelosi, who
battled on the floor of the
house to get the language that
allowed that phase one, phase
two match for the third street
light rail to count towards the
central subway. So all of that
was amazing and fun. Love it.
Love the work, love this agency,
love my team. And I just want to
acknowledge them here today on
the local government affairs.
Chadwick lee, janet martinson
and joel ramos for state,
regional and federal katy
angotti and monique webster. And
on regulatory affairs, kathleen
saecularis and kathy broussard.
And I don't think I've had a
chance for y'all to meet them.
Everybody is humble. Everybody
works their butt off, and we're
all committed to the purpose and
the goals of this agency. And so
I just want to acknowledge and
give them a round of applause as
. So I think I really just want
to make sure that I thank you as
a board for giving me the
opportunity. This board is one
of the most consistently
professional and informed boards
that this city has. And while
it's changed in its purview from
2001, when I came here to work
for muni and was living in the
city, working for the city and
seeing it for all it was and
then this board has really
evolved to be so comprehensive
in the purview that you have
leadership and authority over as
it relates to the streets as
well as muni. So thank you. I
can keep talking. I'll talk to
you guys individually at times,
but just thank you again. And I
read something. Last thing I'll
say is there isn't retirement
anymore. There's retirement
dates. And so this will be my
first retirement. Let's just say
that and I look forward to
continuing to engage in in
public work. So and I believe we
also have somebody here from the
mayor's office who might want to
offer some words. Tom paulino,
tom. Thank you, director tomlin,
chair ekin directors, MADAM City
attorney and MADAM Clerk, my
name is tom paulino. I am the
liaison to the board of
supervisors for mayor breed. I'm
not going to expand beyond what
director tomlin had already said
about kate, but as a point of
personal privilege. And one of
the things I had the opportunity
and privilege to meet kate in my
capacity when I was district
director for then assembly
member david chiu and me getting
up to speed on everything, no
pun intended, related to the
transit was made easy because of
you. Kate and I very much
appreciate all of your insight
and all of your guidance that
you offered me and my team and
the assembly member over the
years. However, in my capacity
today, and this is something
that gives me a lot of joy and
it is a great privilege to offer
. These are not given out willy
nilly. They are for the
exceptional individuals or
organizations in the city that
contribute both in terms of
public service and to their team
and to our constituents
wholesale. But this is a
proclamation from mayor london
and breed recognizing today, day
NOVEMBER 21st, 2023, as kate
breen day in the city and county
of san francisco. So. Right I
think okay yeah.
Okay. Kate, I'll just I'll just
note a lot of the
accomplishments have been cited,
but I'll just note that as I was
reading through the materials,
specifically the legislative
program for next year under the
vision zero section, we will
continue to support efforts that
are consistent with san
francisco's vision zero action
strategy, transformative policy
agenda, which includes two
policy objectives that have now
been achieved. Yes right. Check,
check. Lower speed limits and
speed safety camera
authorization. I just remember
year after year, you coming to
the board. We're going to get it
done. We're going to get it
done. And what a remarkable
thing that you get to retire.
Now, having really checked off
the box on our top legislative
priority. I hope you just feel
so proud of that and that maybe
we can rename some of the speed
safety camera infrastructure
after you as well. I don't know
if director hemminger you want
to share any reflections from
your time at mtc? I certainly
would, and today would be the
day I got to be chatty because I
got a frog in my throat. So I
apologize. Know, kate was
already at mtc when I got there,
so GOD knows how long she had
been working there before. And
actually I had the job she has
here at the mta at mtc. So from
that first day she and I have
been working together. That's
true. And I'm glad that I was
able to catch up with the tail
end of her career here. As you
were certainly ending with a
bang and not a whimper. And they
say you should always leave your
audience wanting more. And
that's just what you've done
with all of us, because we're
used to success with you in
charge. So professionally and
personally, this is a this is a
great day for me and you'll have
plenty to keep you busy. You
could even get appointed to a
transit board. What do you know?
So congratulate us. Thank you.
Thank you very much, stephen.
Thank you. All right. Can I. All
right. Moving along as perhaps
some of you noticed last week
was apec, which was a major
event that involved all hands on
deck effort by staff at the
sfmta. We'll be providing a more
detailed report back later on,
but I have to say how incredibly
proud I am of the agency staff
for the job that they did,
helping to make sure that san
francisco kept moving and
avoided catastrophe. All week,
many of my team worked 16 hour
shifts every day. We had about a
thousand volunteers working as
ambassadors, standing out in the
rain all day long, not only
helping to provide directions to
folks, but responding instant
early to changes in bus routing
that we had to do to deal with
first amendment activity and
other unexpected events that
were kind of constantly
occurring. In some ways, I feel
like the staff response to apec
was a culmination of much of the
cultural change work that we've
been doing over the last four
years, including how we had to
come together during covid. This
is an amazing team in any
emergency and we were fortunate
that this emergency we actually
had the opportunity to plan for
in advance. I could not be
prouder of the work that the
team has done and I'm sure
christine will forward to you. A
little quick video that I did in
the field as I was running
around on muni and my bike,
seeing how things were working
and checking in with my team and
telling them just how proud I
was of them. So more details on
that later. I'm also next
subject. Glad to announce that
in fact, last week on NOVEMBER
15th, the mtc commission did
vote to support the staff
recommendation for the
allocation on of california
state transportation agency
funding for the sfmta. The total
comes. To $309 million and we
are incredibly grateful to the
governor, to the state
legislature and to the full mtc
commission, along with its staff
for making those recommendations
. And now hopefully moving
forward with allocating them.
Bree mcwhirter, our cfo, will be
providing an update at our next
meeting on what that means for
our budget. But one thing I can
assure you is we still remained
in the worst financial crisis of
our agency's history. But this
contribution buys us a
significant amount of time to
continue our work at solving the
underlying structural problem.
It also makes sure that we do
not have to cut muni service
next year, and we are incredibly
grateful for that. Next up, I
wanted to provide an update also
on our regional efforts. And
this is on regional transit
network management. At we as you
know, have been working since
the very beginning of covid to
coordinate with all of the
transit operators in the region.
And since the beginning of
covid, every monday morning at 9
a.M, the general managers of the
larger agencies meet along with
our staffs in order to
coordinate efforts and also to
help figure out how do we make
the over all transportation
system look like a single
integrated system from a user
perspective? And how do we
communicate our needs for
dealing with the stuff at the
edges where things are not as
connected as they should be? So
we have been working
collaboratively only with staff.
The metropolitan transportation
commission, with several state
legislators and all the
operators on a whole variety of
programs. And we're starting to
really get some momentum now. So
some of the key work from this
year include a successful first
year pilot of the clipper bay
pass program. Phase one, which
provides unlimited transit use
for our people at key
institutions. Phase one included
academic institutions ans, like
santa rosa college and san
francisco state university
collected a lot of data on that
and now mtc is moving on to
phase two, which will include
food a employer pass that can be
made available to all employers
in the region. This is a
critical next step and something
that MAY be a key component of
our larger regional funding
strategy for dealing with the
fiscal cliff. We're also
underway with a no cost and
reduced cost interagency
transfer pilot project, which
caps the transfer penalty for
folks who have to transfer, say,
between muni and bart or between
ac transit and bart or muni and
samtrans so that people aren't
penalized just because they
happen to live on the other side
of a county line. Again, an
effort to make the system work
from a user perspective as if it
were one single integrated
system. We're also working
collaboratively with all of the
agencies and mtc on a regional
wayfinding strategy that
includes signage, whole
wayfinding typology, system
mapping and other
characteristics so that again,
all of our collateral material
looks like it's a part of one
system. And finally, we're
working together as two
operators in order to make sure
that we can ensure our and
maintain ties, timed transfers
at key transfer hubs among
agencies. Staff have done some
extraordinary work on this
topic, including making us all
suddenly realize that one of the
most critical elements of
ensuring and maintaining time
transfers is aligning the
operator sign up schedules in
our labor agreements because
that is the time at which we
adjust our schedules and it is
limited because our people who
work for our agencies need to
actually be able to plan their
lives and schedules for their
kids. And we realize that our
operator sign up schedules are
perfectly misaligned, but it is
relatively straightforward thing
that we can do in order to
underpin in an effort to ensure
and maintain time transfers. We
are also working at the
structural level in order to
bring all the operators together
in a more formal way. We have
begun regular meetings of a new
region panel, network management
committee at mtc. Mtc has hired
melanie choi as the first
regional network management
director. Because one of the
things that we realized of
course, is that if there's no
staff in charge of making it
happen, it is not going to
happen. And in addition to that,
each of the operators is
offering seconded staff,
dedicated time in order to work
on these regional efforts in a
coordinated way. The regional
network management council,
which I am a member of, will
host its first meeting on
tuesday, NOVEMBER 27th. This is
a meeting of all of the large
transit agency general managers,
three small agency reps and the
mtc executive director. And at
our first meeting we will
discuss our year one work
program focused on customer
facing tanjil able outcomes in
order to help not only make the
system work, but also build
trust with the electorate who we
are reliant on for addressing
our financial challenges. So I
am very proud to have helped
lead these efforts over the last
couple of years and to see that
they are finally bearing fruit
and also grateful for yet again
for our government affairs team,
for their strong support in
making all of this happen. And
finally, I want to provide an
update on valencia street,
something that has been in the
news a lot, and staff are
working hard on. As you know, we
are currently having a pilot
program underway in order to
achieve goals of advancing
cyclist and pedestrian safety on
valencia street and ensuring
that we maintain good emergency
vehicle access and supporting
small business success in a
challenging economic time for
san francisco. We have obviously
heard a lot from pedestrian and
cyclist advocates. We're also
hearing a lot from small
business owners and so we are
continually making adjustments
based upon what we hear in order
to advance safety and in order
to help the small businesses. So
one of the things that we did
early in the program is to make
sure that the critical
commercial loading functions
that had been happening in the
bike lane, that those functions
could be accommodated at the
curb and that effort was
successful. However, many of the
small business owners are
concerned that we have been too
successful with that goal and
too much customer and employee
parking has been removed in
order to make that happen. So
the team has been making a lot
of observations of the street
and talking to small business
owners and is working now at
fine tuning the dials on the
loading zones so that the hours
of enforcement for the loading
zones better match the need and
that those loading zones can be
converted into customer parking
when they're not needed for
loading. So the team is now
working on a lot of changes and
adjustments to the loading zone.
Signs the hours of enforcement
eliminating some zones where
they're clearly not needed in
order to make sure again that we
can optimize across all of these
goals, particularly around
safety and small business
success. We're also working in
order to make sure more people
know about the hoff street and
mission. Bartlett garages as
places where customers can park
and will continue to make small
adjustments while we do our
larger and more formal
evaluation that will be coming
to you with in early 2024. And
that it is my director's report.
Thank you, colleagues. Are there
questions for director tumlin?
Okay okay. Seeing none right now
, let's open to public comment
for anyone in the room on the
director's report. And board
members. Luke bornheimer I'll
keep my comments focused on
valencia street. I am
disappointed to see the agency
investing more time and energy
on the center bikeway design
that has resulted in many more
people crashing and being
injured and MAY have also
resulted in businesses getting
less business. There is a
mountain of data that shows that
curbside protected bike lanes as
well as pedestrianization of a
street would greatly benefit
businesses if we were a
visionary city with a mayor who
had a vision, we would be
installing one of those things
and addressing the business
needs. Making the streets safer
for people and helping our
businesses recover. So I
continue to be disappointed that
the agency hasn't created a
design for curbside protected
bike lanes or pedestrianization.
they've only created just simple
mocks and as a result, agency
staff have continued to tell the
public that if the current
center bikeway was removed that
we would have to go back to
paint only unprotected bike
lanes, which of course nobody
wants this. This lack of an
alternative design leaves us in
a really vulnerable situation
where if something tragic
happens, we have to remove the
center bikeway and go back to
what we all don't want to go
back to. So I implore you to ask
staff to urge staff to create
designs, official designs,
complete designs for those
options so that if we do need to
remove the center bikeway, we
have something to go to. And in
case you didn't know, there is a
design for curbside protected
bike lanes between 19th and
cesar chavez from 2020, it is a
complete design, including dutch
style protected intersections.
So the only part that needs to
be designed is between 15th and
19th. Thank you so much. Thank
you. Any other speakers in the
room? Okay. Please open a remote
at this time. We'll move to
remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator first speaker
. Hello. Good afternoon. Chair
aitken and mta board members.
This is my open message to kate.
I worked in government affairs
also and although I could not
physically be there today, I
didn't want to MISS The
opportunity to congratulate kate
you on your amazing career
achievements as mta government
affairs director. Thank you for
always providing and promoting
great leadership, communication,
inclusiveness, integrity,
mentorship, excellence and
teamwork. I've never been so
honored to work with such an
amazing group of people, and
it's due to your effortless
leadership and integrity. I've
learned from you. You don't have
to be great to start, but you
have to start to be great. Thank
you for your grit, grind and
greatness. Thank you for always
allowing all of our voices to be
heard and most importantly, I
will MISS Knocking on your
window even when you're on a
meeting and you still turn it
around with a big smile and
waving at me. Thank you, kate.
Enjoy your new journey and job
well done. I MISS You. And big
hugs. I'll MISS You. And thank
you. You left us well, thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker.
Hello good afternoon. This is
barry toronto. I want to
congratulate kate green on her
first retirement. And I wish her
luck in her her next next
endeavors before she retires
again. I just I think she's
accomplished a lot. Too bad she
she wasn't able to get the
legislature to allow the city to
regulate tax or to have some
control over them. The next
topic is apec. Apec was a
disaster for cab drivers. There
were a lot of at night and
couldn't access the union square
transit lanes. I will address
that more during my regular
public comment and we didn't. We
didn't we did horribly except
for the two days after the
conference when the security
personnel all used taxis to head
back to washington, dc, so that
was extremely helpful. Some of
the hotels, except that having
access to them were blocked. The
cab vans were blocked in some
cases. So hopefully for the
christmas holiday season we can
work something out and also
finally and not least about the
valencia street. It'd be great
if you took away the center
lane. I've had to go in there
several times late at night due
to the blockage by garbage
trucks and garbage trucks need
to do their job. But we also
need to do our job as well. And
encountering a garbage truck in
the middle of the block is can
be a problem at times. Thank you
very much. Thank you know
additional callers. Okay. Thank
you. Unless there are comments
from my colleagues on the
director's report we can move on
places you on item number eight.
The citizens advisory council
report. We actually have no
report for that. Council places
you on item number nine. General
public comment members of the
public are MAY address the board
of directors on matters that are
within the board's jurisdiction
and are not on today's calendar.
We did receive a request. For
language services today for
spanish and brazilian portuguese
interpretation. And let's start
with spanish interpretation for
any members of the public
requesting spanish
interpretation, please come to
the podium to provide comment at
this time. Okay and if I can
have my spanish translator,
please make their way to the mic
. And then after this group, we
will move to brazilian
portuguese translation so
spanish first. Okay, maybe the
translator can make that
announcement in spanish. Yes.
Can you. Buenos tardes. Para las
personas su comentario publico
en espanol, por favor. Pongase
en linea para presentar lo.
Yeah, it's just better if
there's an actual translator. Go
ahead. Okay hola. Buenas tardes.
Yo, soy el, senor vicente mejia.
Estoy partido en la in winston
cuatro veinte tengo tres anos de
estar para cada el motivo de sa
partido no alcanzo para pagar
una renta. He. Con en vivo con
mi hijo se llama el camino
tambie
n la re
union el se llama.
Nathan stanley mejia dos anos el
trabajo de tambie
n uber entonces
espero ustedes. Algun parker
para nosotros para toda la
comunidad e porque si mucho
accidentes e tocar la puerta asi
como un maiz como messi medio en
el carro el medio de los carros
ryan he knows no se
como a la en
la noche media todo eso he. La
habia si and habias cosa ozone
depletion de agua cosas asi es
por eso el motivo nosotros
estamos aqui espero para todos
los estamos I un un un poco
especial para nosotros si. Eso
son mes mis preguntas ustedes
para ver si pueden por un par
cuyo para si es esto. Okay.
Gracias. Hello. Good afternoon.
My name is walter vicente mejia,
and I am part at winstone for 20
and I've been part there for
three years. The reason is that
I don't have the money to pay a
rent. I lived there with my son.
My son is coming here. His name
is nathan stanley mejia. He is
22 years old. He works as a
dishwasher. And I work for uber.
And I hope that we can find
parking for the whole community
because there's many accidents
there. And they come late at
night knocking at your door
about a month and a half or two
months ago, there was an
accident and my glass, my window
was broken. That happened around
11, 1130 at night. And there is
many arabs that are throwing
there's like water explosions
and that's why I'm here today,
because I hope that we can find
some kind of special parking for
us. So that's why I'm here, to
see if you can do that for us.
We call the next speaker. Please
okay. Okay. If we could then
move to brazilian portuguese
interpretation. If I could have
my interpreter please come up
and make an announcement. I
gotta speak fazer algum
comentario in portuguese. Podem
ver ate
aqui.
Um ola todos e presidentes. Meu
nome cayo el morro winston drive
mas o menos un mundo emilio moro
sozinho como eu no tengo
conditions de dakar con el eu un
poco pasado para mi yo no
conseguiu motorhome para mi no
fecha de rua ali eu tenho un
poco de dignidade para para mi
sobrevivir con icu morando ali
mas despesas he sobrevivir muito
bem ella temos uma boa vicinanza
nos mesmo nos temos um problema
a relacionado a alguns coisa do
shiloh nos dice ali peso de
orszagos diretas do transito de
san francisco de nos de tempo
para possamos conseguir un lugar
permanent para fechar arms e si
nos podemos contar com auxilio
da cidade para nos ajudar essa
solucao serra de grande de ajuda
para para todos nos agradezco a
oportunidade e o tempo de voces
obrigado. Hello my name is kyle.
I live on mission drive. I've
been there for about a year and
a half. I live alone and I don't
have the means to pay for rent
all by myself. That's why I got
a motor home where I can have
some dignity. And then in that
way, I can. I'm able to pay all
of my bills and have an okay
life. We have good neighbors
there. We are not the type of
people that get in trouble. We
don't have any problems. So I'm
asking I'm here to ask for the
board to give us more time to
find a solution, to get another
place to live, a better place.
So I'm asking for the city also
to maybe help us in any way
possible. I would like to thank
you. Next speaker. Bravissimo.
Ola my name is leandro luis.
Your model aqui. Now, winston,
drive in home. One email my
manos komminsk rosa della kelly.
Nice vamos in know-so motor home
por que
no tenemos condiciones
de pagar el costo elevado he y
sentimos seguros en mi esposa
puede ser una volta a noite do
trabalho in seguranca e eu posso
preocupado por necessidade nos
necesitamos podemos ajuda porque
si vamos um tenemos para nos
sabemos fazer para a de la no
sabe vamos fazer por estamos
aqui ajuda nos estamos porque
precisamos realmente no estamos
apartamento uma casa porque no
tenemos realmente condiciones.
Okay obrigado. Good afternoon.
My name is leandro lewis. I live
in on winston drive at a motor
home. I've been there for about
a year and a half with my wife
kelly. We are living there.
We're living in this motor home
because we don't have the means
to pay for rent, especially
because rents are very high now,
now and so we are we feel safe
there. I feel safe with my wife
there. She can go out in the
morning and come back in the
evening, even when it's dark and
I feel safe about that. So we
are there because we don't have
another place to go. We would
love to be able to rent an
apartment and everything, but we
just don't have the means to do
that. And so we don't know what
to do. We are if we're asked to
move out, we don't know where to
go. We don't have a place to go
and we don't know what to do.
That's why I'm asking for help.
Thank you. Thank you. Additional
speakers requiring
interpretation. Requesting
interpretation. Myself
interpretation. MADAM PRESIDENT.
So calzado no avail. I'm
exposed. You as it more temos on
songy on e the concern was
poorer. You see sad you know tem
para e fazer e foresight la no
tem protege see. Good afternoon.
My name is person. I am married.
I live in an rv with my wife and
children and we live there
because we don't have means to
pay rent. Our income is very low
and we just don't have another
place to go if we're asked to
move out, we won't know what to
do. We just don't have another
place to go. That's it. Thank
you. Additional speakers. They
might as well. Preciso de
interpretacao. Seeing seeing
none. Our interpreters will stay
through this item if we require
if there are any additional
members of the public who want
to speak, I can move to then our
speaker cards. I have speaker
cards for flo kelly and richard
rothman. You can approach the
podium now and then we can
perhaps start with the line
that's forming on the side.
After that. Good afternoon
again. My name is richard
rothman. I live in the outer
richmond. Or as your staff likes
to call it, the county. You can
ask them why they call the outer
richmond, the county. But I live
off of fulton street. I live
near 37th and fulton. And this
is a very dangerous intersection
in there. I've gone to the
engineer spring street committee
a number of times to ask all I'm
asking is that the signal light
when the light turns, turns
green, that the countdown signal
goes on automatically because if
it doesn't, it's a shorter time
to walk. And I've seen seniors
not pressing the countdown time.
And even with the countdown,
even when I press the countdown
time, I can barely make it
across the street. So it needs
to be lengthened. There's been a
death at the intersection.
There's been a person who ended
up in the icu and now that the
street division is going to be
getting new leadership, it's
time to change. And, you know,
the nine years that I've been
following it, it hasn't changed.
It needs to be more. More
service to the more response to
the community needs. You know, I
pay my taxes and I expect to
have the streets safe where I
can walk and that's mta job is
to make the streets where I can
walk. And also each departments
don't talk to each other for the
street, the street division,
engineering took out a blue zone
and they didn't even tell the
color code. I had to tell a
color code to put in a new new
blue zone. That's not right.
When they take out a blue zone,
they should put another one in
at the same time. So so I hope
to see some changes. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Could we
have the next speaker, please.
Hello I'm flo kelly and I work
with the coalition on
homelessness and the stop
poverty coalition. And I'm a
firm believer in team building
and as and I can see how
important it is to make headway.
So one of the things that we
would love to do is build more
teamwork with with mta the
staff, the board, you know, I
don't think we should be arguing
with each other. I think we
should figure out ways to come
together and help everyone who's
in great need. So I'm obviously
here for winston and all the
folks that live on it. The last
time I counted there was like 48
rvs that are there. So a four
hour limit would really misplace
a lot of people and I'm here for
everyone, but I want to point
out one person who we have met
named hamlet lee calderon. She
wanted to be here today. But six
months ago, she got hit by a
muni bus and she had a medical
appointment. Today and that's
going to be true of the next
board meeting that you have,
DECEMBER 15th. So since that
time, she's not been able to
work and she has her family
living with her in her rv on
winston. And it it's really
important that we look at this
as you know, people who who are
marginalized and really because
we need their their work but
they're not being paid enough in
this very expensive city. Thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker,
please. I do have more speaker
cards. Javier bremond, eliana
binder moose venmo. Mario smith.
Good afternoon. My name is
eliana binder and I'm the policy
manager for glide. Since this
board voted on SEPTEMBER 19th to
approve for our parking limits
on winston drive and buckingham
way, we have redoubled our
efforts to partner with hsh to
secure housing and a safe
parking site for the community
of dozens of families, students
and seniors who cannot afford
the bay area's high rents and
are living in rvs on winston
drive and buckingham way. This
community has been stressed,
anxious, confused about what
will happen and where they will
go. Since they will not be able
to leave work or school to
regularly move their vehicles to
comply with the parking limits
and avoid ticketing and towing.
We are grateful that this board
agreed to delay, implement ation
of the parking limits for three
months until DECEMBER 19th.
However as that date approaches,
the city has not yet been able
to establish a safe parking site
or connect everyone with
housing. Therefore, we are
respectfully urging you to delay
implementation if the families
living in rvs are displaced and
scattered after the parking
limits start, it becomes
extremely difficult to support
and connect people with
resources. When their lives have
been destabilized and they
cannot be reached in a certain
set location. So supervisor
melgar's office and I have been
working on a safe parking site,
as have we. We have also been
trying to connect people with
housing, but we need more time.
There are hundreds of homeless
families in san francisco
desperately waiting for shelter.
It does not make sense to
displace this community and
destabilize these families
before they can access housing.
A safe parking site and
continued housing connections
will help avoid the worst
outcomes of these parking
restrictions and provide these
families with the dignity and
stability that they deserve.
Please give us more time so that
we can work on real solutions.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Hello,
directors. My name is sheba van
dba. I'm a policy associate with
glide and a member of the end
poverty coalition. I I'm here
today because I'm deeply
concerned about the impact of
this looming for parking
restriction on winston
buckingham way as we stated
before to you all, this location
is currently a place where
community of monolingual,
spanish speaking and portuguese
residents have resided since the
pandemic. They need and they
deserve our community support
from all of us to get them to a
place of stability. San
francisco has a limited family
shelter and affordable housing,
and it can take time to access.
So we ask this board to consider
delaying implementation of these
parking restrictions. As
community advocates, we've been
working all the angles possible
to make sure that these families
are not displaced through
enforcement vehicle. Our
homelessness is not isn't
something isn't only impacting
this already vulnerable
community, but many across the
city. The state and this nation.
We appreciate those of you who
have made an effort to work with
us to uplift this issue. And we
extend an invite to others who
understand how detrimental this
issue is. We urge all city
departments supporting people
experiencing homelessness and
economic difficulties to
collaborate with one another and
to partner with cbos community
based organizations that are
serving those communities in
need. And please do not let
these families scatter, which
will take and make make it
harder for asians to find them
and support them in finding
alternative options that meet
their needs. We're asking for a
delay in implementation until a
safe parking site or housing
options are made available to
this community. Thank you. Thank
you. Next speaker, please. Good
afternoon. Chair and directors.
My name is javier bermont and
I'm an organizer with the
coalition on homelessness and
also part of the end poverty
coalition. And yeah, I just want
to echo what's been said already
is that I strongly urge that
this board, you know, put the
parking restrictions on the
agenda before for the 19th and,
and continue to delay the
implementation of these parking
restrictions because as we've
heard from folks, we would be
quite literally towing folks
homes away at. And, you know, i
think what we're coming out as a
public to say today is that we
don't want bureaucratic
indifference to be the reason
why we have dozens of people,
you know, descend further into
homelessness like they're
already in a really precarious
situation housing wise. And what
we're what we're asking, you
know, as a community is that we
just have a little bit more time
so we can do what we set out to
do. And what we tried to agree
on in SEPTEMBER, which is that
we need time to get people
housed and we need time to get a
safe parking site. And if we're
this close to actually getting
people the support and the
access to housing that they need
, then we shouldn't just let the
deadline expire and put people
out on the street. So I really
strongly urge today that the mta
board votes to delay the parking
restrictions for winston drive
and buckingham way. Thank you.
Thank you for your comment. Next
speaker, please. Good afternoon.
Boards and chairs. My name is
mario smith. I'm with the
coalition on homelessness and
the stop poverty toes coalition.
I'm here to ask what everyone
else has been asking. MAY we
please get more time concerning
this ordeal? The moment that the
moment the parking meters goes
up, as they said, all the
families will scatter. The work
we've been doing with them will
all be for naught. And I would
we simply need more time as
everyone's already said, I'm
here to echo and add to that
voice. But please, guys, we need
more time for the families
specifically. Yeah it's as
simple as that. Thank you for
your time. Thank you for your
comment. Next speaker, please.
Good afternoon, board members.
My name is goulet moussa. I am
the community engagement manager
with the episcopal community
services and also a member of
the end poverty toes coalition.
I want to express our solidarity
with the residents and their
call for an extension on winston
drive and buckingham way. I urge
that you consider this matter
with utmost urgency and
compassion. This community is in
dire need of a tangible solution
to house them or provide a safe
site for their rvs to park
without fear of fines and
displacement. To start finding
this community will only
exacerbate their financial
struggles and displacement,
especially during the holidays.
We kindly request that you put
the extension discussion as an
agenda item. Do so will allow
this community to have a sense
of security and peace of mind
during these trying times. Thank
you for your time and
consideration. Thank you for
your comment. Next speaker,
please. I have an additional
speaker card. Juana ramos.
Hello. Good afternoon, everyone.
My name is juan ramos. I'm a
peer organizer with the
coalition on homelessness. Um,
same with everybody said,
echoing what they said. But in
my perspective, I want you guys
each one of you guys to put
yourselves in their point of
shoes. And imagine you guys were
in an rv and then you guys have
to work 24 over seven or 9 to 5,
and you guys can't afford to
move your cars. Then you guys
get tickets, right? Those
tickets get piled up. You guys
can't afford that. Boom, you
lose your car. Where do you go
if the shelters are all booked
up? Do everything has been
booked up? Where do you go? So
we could prevent homelessness by
at least extending. That's the
least we're asking is an
extension of time for until, you
know, maybe permanent housing or
everybody has their different
needs. But this is very
important. Maybe not for you,
but for this community, it is.
And I made sure today that I
came to advocate and speak up on
behalf of those who cannot be
here. For example, like flo
said, yamila is one of the
families who was always showing
up. But due to her getting in an
accident with the sfmta or muni,
therefore she cannot work. She
cannot pay, pay certain bills or
pay rent. So again, anybody can
end up homeless in a blink of an
eye. Just try putting yourself
in their shoes and really think
about it. What would you guys
do? What would you guys go if
you guys were homeless and had
nowhere else but your rv? So
thank you for your time, but
please have a heart. And we
really request either an
extension safe parking housing,
but please work with us to work
with you to work with them. It
takes a community to literally
take care of our whole city and
community. So together where we
could be stronger, not divided.
Thank you. Thank you for your
comment. Do we have any other
speakers in the room for general
public comment today? One more.
Okay. My name is chaya french
and I am a staff member at
senior and disability action and
i just wanted to come up here,
come up here and speak in
support of everyone who just
spoke up about winston drive and
buckingham way, seniors and
people with disabilities are
more likely to have unstable
housing and live in rvs and cars
, and that's because of lack of
accessible housing, lack of
employment opportunities and the
reality of living with more
health, health issues and
ableism and ageism. So this is
an issue that's really important
to us, and I can't quite imagine
what could be more important
than people having a safe place
to live to enforce this parking
restrictions. I believe that we
as a city and we as a community,
we have a responsibility to
create a city where everyone can
have housing that works for them
and we're not there yet. And
until we are, I don't think we
have any right to create rules
that police the existence of
people who just need resources.
I think at a minimum, the ask
that people are making feels so
small to find a process that
works for everyone to have the
housing that they need to have a
place to park. And I think we
owe it to people to make that
process as humane and as many
minimally stressful as possible.
And for it to take however many
months it needs to take. Thank
you. Thank you for your comment.
We have no other speakers in the
room. Could you please open
remote? Secretary silva at this
time we'll move to remote public
comment not to exceed a total
time of ten minutes. Members of
the public wishing to comment
should star three to enter the
queue. Each speaker will have
two minutes. Moderator first
speaker hello. Good afternoon
again. This is barry toronto. I
first want to point out, I meant
to mention the director's report
that directors hamlin mentioned
NOVEMBER 27th. He said it's a
tuesday. The 27th is a monday,
so you might want to correct
that in the minutes because
that's not the date. It's not a
tuesday. The next topic is it's
now coming on to the holiday
season and heavy security around
union square started already.
And it'd be great if to make
sure to know that the ada and
the transit first policy should
allow taxis to use the transit
lanes even though it's closed to
other traffic at night. It'd be
great if your your top people,
such as the chair and director
tomlin, meet with the police
brass and make sure that word
gets out to all the officers is
that that taxis are allowed to
use the transit lanes even
through union square and we
carry people who cannot get on a
bus or cannot sit and wait for
an hour for a bus to show up at
night particularly. And it would
be great if you if you made sure
that we had access to the
transit lanes through union
square and also to make sure
that that we have clear cab
stands in the union square area,
especially around the hotels and
at macy's. So I appreciate that
you can help facilitate this.
And make it happen sooner than
later. Thank you very much for
your time. Thank you. Next
speaker. Hello my name is rachel
clyde. I'm the west side
community organizer with the san
francisco bicycle coalition. To
recap where we are in JANUARY of
this year, the lake merced
boulevard quick build was
approved during the approval,
the mta pledged to delay
implementation until supervisor
melgar and hsh could find a safe
relocation site for the rvs that
park along lake merced
boulevard. We are very
supportive of this quick build
project as it will provide vital
safety and access improvements
and expand the bike network.
However, almost a year later,
there is still no safe parking
site and the mta has moved
forward with construction on
lake merced boulevard, where
several rvs have already been
towed as a result. Additionally
in mid SEPTEMBER, the board of
directors approved parking
restriction changes on two
adjacent streets winston and
buckingham. That will displace
even more families living in rvs
as the sf bicycle coalition. It
is our mission to transform san
francisco's streets and
neighborhoods into safe just and
livable places by promoting the
bicycle for everyday
transportation, creating a new
bike lane by displacing dozens
of families does not create the
just community. We are part of
the end poverty coalition and
support the work this group has
been doing to support the
families, students and seniors
living in their vehicles. We are
disappointed by the board's
decision to move to approve and
move forward with construction
on the lake. Merced quick build
and the parking changes on
winston buckingham without
adequately supporting the
housing insecure individuals
that live there. Transportation,
safety and housing and security
are two of the largest issues
facing our city, and we will not
fix them by pitting the issues
against each other. We stand
with the end poverty coast
coalition and the residents and
ask the mta board to delay the
parking restriction changes on
winston and buckingham. And we
demand that supervisor melgar
and the board work urgently to
find a safe relocation site and
permanent housing for the people
who will soon be displaced.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker. Hi, this is kristin
evans. I'm a small business
owner and also also serve on the
homeless oversight commission.
Um, I really do hope that we can
work together as mta and. To
come up with a timeline that
doesn't involve displacement
before the individuals being
impacted are given appropriate
offers. As the commission in our
last update was that there had
been outreach to about a quarter
to a fifth of the residents that
had been placed with appropriate
offers, and so that had left a
significt gap in the remaining
people that still needed to be
given an appropriate offer. Um,
it's my understanding that
there's plans for a safe sleep
site or a safe parking site, but
we've not heard the details of
that or an opening date. So this
is really about cross
departmental cooperation and
acting as one city and making
sure that we are doing right by
the people that these new
enforcement measures will
displace. So I ask your
assistance in ensuring that we
have a timeline that works for
both department sites and
ensures that the people that are
currently on these two streets.
Winston and buckingham, are
given appropriate offers before
enforcement begins. Thank you.
Thank you. No additional callers
. Okay we'll close public
comment for item nine. Uh,
colleagues, any further
discussion on items raised today
? Okay. I'll just. I'll just
state I and director tomlin had
some correspondence about this.
We're firmly in support of cross
departmental coordination with.
That's why we brought emily
cohen to the previous hearing
and modified our board action in
response to the guidance
received and I have received a
request from the coalition on
property tours for a meeting and
we have a meeting set with staff
next monday to further continue
coordination discussion on this
pressing issue of affordable
housing in this city. Director
tomlin, is there anything you
want to want to add or respond?
And if not, we can move forward.
I think we discussed at the last
meeting we want to do everything
that we can to avoid towing
vehicles and to also make sure
that we're respecting all san
francisco residents and we look
forward to our ongoing
collaboration with. All right.
Thank you. Let's move on to the
consent calendar, please. Thank
you. Director. Is that places
you on item ten, your consent
calendar. These items are
considered to be routine and
will be acted upon by a single
vote unless a member of the
board or public wishes to
consider an item separately for
all speakers. Providing public
comment, please identify which
item number you are speaking to.
Item 10.1 requesting the
controller to a-lot funds and to
draw warrants against such funds
available or will be available
in payment of the listed claims
against the sfmta. That's item
10.1. A item 10.2 approving
various routine parking and
traffic modifications and making
environmental review findings
for items a through. I in the
agenda item 10.3 establishing
the 2024 sfmta board of
directors and parking authority
commission meeting schedule item
ten sorry, that was item 10.3.
Item 10.4. Adopting a resolution
of local support for programing
regional measure three bridge
toll funds in the amount of
approximately $22.6 million for
three sfmta projects. The
potrero modernization project.
For approximately $3.5 million.
The presidio modernization
project for approximately $12.6
million and the light rail
vehicle procurement for
approximately $6.5 million. And
providing assurances that the
sfmta will comply with mtc
policies. Item 10.5 adopting a
resolution of local support for
pending approximate $1.5 million
grant that the sfmta has been
awarded by the metropol written
transportation commissions mtc's
local parking management program
implementation program for the
san francisco pay or permit
parking expansion project and
providing assurances that the
sfmta will comply with mtc
policies associated with the
receipt of these funds. An item
10.6 adopting a resolution of
local support for the programing
of state transportation
improvement program funds in the
amount of approximately $53
million for the new flier
mid-life overhaul project and
providing assurances to comply
with mtc's policies that
concludes your consent calendar.
Thank you, colleagues. Are there
any questions on the consent
calendar from directors? I don't
have a question, MADAM Chair,
but just a quick comment and you
don't. We do not need to
separate this item and I will
move all the items after public
comment. But just to comment
quickly on the very last item on
our consent calendar. 10.2 item
I, uh, this is for the elm alley
project and for the elm street
closure. We did receive a packet
of signatures in support from
some tenderloin community school
students on this. This is a
closure for, for the recreation
area, for an additional
recreation area. For them. This
is a project that was allocated
funding in the tenderloin
community action plan. Um as we
know, the, the tenderloin is the
dense most we populated
neighborhood in the most densely
populated neighborhood in the
city and also has the most
children and also the least open
space in the city. We're trying
to change that with a couple of
projects, including the golden
gate greenway and this project.
So this will, um, the funding
department is going to sort of
co-design a play area upon
approval of this closure. So in
full support of it and looking
forward to, to seeing what they
do with it and inactivated
street closure. Thank you for
raising that director agency.
Any other comments or questions
from board members on the
consent calendar? Okay,
colleagues, I did want to flag a
couple of the items that are
street changes under 10.2 just
to make sure this board is aware
of what we're being asked to
approve. So that's our items a,
a and b, b also item are these
are these are approvals for our
class two and class three
bikeways as and the I find the
numbering scheme for bikeways to
be very counter intuitive and
confusing. We our class one is
essentially a separated bike
trail. Class two is a painted
bike lane, but no physical
protection class three is
essentially a shared route where
you might have a sharrow in the
space, but cars and bikes
sharing the same space. Class
four is a protected bike lane.
Someone should work on
renumbering that. So it makes
more sense. But I just wanted to
flag for my colleagues that
through the active communities
plan, we've been doing a lot of
surveys of the types of
facilities that make people safe
, feel safe riding in this city
and no surprise, the data we
have received are exactly what
you would think that people are
most comfortable in spaces like
jfk promenade that are
completely car free and
completely safe operated. And
then they are somewhat
comfortable in physically
protected spaces and most
people, from what I've seen,
feel very, very uncomfortable
being asked to share the same
space with a car or a class
three route. So I just wanted to
sort of ask, we have adopted a
goal for the active communities
plan and for streets in the city
that that are our plan should be
safe and intuitive for all
users. So I just want to ask
staff, whoever is meant to
respond to this sort of how do
we think class two and class
three facilities sort of meet
that standard of being safe and
intuitive for all users? And I'm
just personally feeling somewhat
uncomfortable continuing to
approve these types of
facilities. Good afternoon.
Ricardo lee, city traffic
engineer. So the items before
you are part of the treasure
island planning process in which
various cities departments have
participated, including to sfcta
caltrans mta, public works. This
has been part of a very long
process, a process that is
common to other new development
areas. As I do want to assure
the board that when we as staff
are at meetings discussing new
streets, that we are taking the
feedback that we're learning
over time about bicycle
facilities, pedestrian
facilities, vision zero. And we
are taking those lessons into
new street design as much as
possible. So the facilities that
are in treasure island
specifically that are related to
getting in and out of the area,
are protected. They are not
adjacent to parking. They would
be considered type four
facilities, bike paths or type
two facilities without parking
adjacent to them. So the goal
there is that if you are on a
main street or approaching
treasure island, that you would
not be also trying to juggle
adjacent park vehicles. There
are, of course, multiple
considerations that go into
street design, emergency
response and the space available
. There's a lot of space
constraints, the developable
land. Sometimes some facilities
take up more land than others
and so we do need to be mindful
of those kind of needs in
certain situations where the
streets are calm street, a local
street, perhaps it MAY not have
a class four facility, but but
it MAY have other types of
bicycle facilities to facilitate
safe travel based on it being
more of a local street, a slow
street. So every everything that
we learn gets incorporated into
designs. Unfortunately, the
designs are part of a long
process that MAY have started
ten years ago. MAY have already
been approved. But we do go, as
advocates of vision zero and
livability, we making sure that
there is adequate bicycle
facilities, but as well making
sure that the streets are calm,
as narrow as they can be, that
they're safe intersections. All
those kind of considerations go
into it and there are, like I
said, guidance that goes into
it. Multiple departments get the
comment, including the fire
department on how wide streets
can be. And those are all issues
that the city has kind of
grappled with in the past. But I
think we're at this point at a
at a point in which we are all
kind of aligned in terms of
these these street designs. So
that's kind of at a broad level.
You know, the board, I think,
directs us to kind of implement
these these street changes. But
on these kind of processes,
we're working as a city,
creating a brand new city, brand
new street grids and we're
trying to do as best as we can
to create new streets that don't
have the issues of our old
streets. We certainly don't want
to have those kind of problems.
So okay, I think we MAY be
approaching the sever threshold.
I'm looking at the city attorney
. What do you think? If we want
to have more discussion on this
topic or can we just go on?
Yeah, if you'd like to have more
discussion on, I would recommend
you sever it. If you're
satisfied with staff's response,
you can just move forward with,
okay, I think I'm going to go
ahead and sever sever b and r
and then we can move ahead with
the consent calendar. So we'll
take public comment separately
on those pieces. Director
hemminger well, if we're going
to sever the items, I'll wait to
talk on the severed items. Okay,
great. So let's, let's move
forward to public comment on the
consent calendar. Less a, b, b,
and item r of 10.2, please. Are
there any public comments on
that section of the consent
calendar. Secretary silva can I
present them? Sure.
I board members. Luke bornheimer
I would encourage you to sever
item 10.2 to be, which is about
bayshore boulevard. So I wanted
to bring this up so you can see
this. I ride this section of
bayshore many times with my
child and witnessed many other
people riding it. So 10.2 be
currently creates a class four
bikeway, which is a great thing.
We should have more class four
bikeways in the city. We should
really only be building those in
the city. Unfortunately, it's
only northbound. So if you look
here and actually if I if I zoom
in, you will see that the
southbound a bike route on this
section is actually on the
sidewalk, which includes a fire
hydrant. And a pole in the
middle of the sidewalk. If
you're riding a family cargo
bike, you can't ride on that
sidewalk. So I like 99% of
people who ride a bike
southbound through the section
right in the right turn lane on
an eight lane, one way road that
is a highway off ramp and a
highway on ramp. This is every
day reality of riding a bike for
everyday transportation in san
francisco, people will ride
southbound in that northbound
bikeway. It should be designed
and built as a two way bikeway.
I don't quite care about space
constraints or the fire
department or whoever else gets
input. People are using that
right turn lane as a two way
bikeway right now. We should
build and design on our bike
infrastructure to match how
people are actually using our
bike infrastructure in the city.
So I appreciate staff's work on
it. I have talked to public
works about this and mta staff
about this in the past and I
just encourage you to sever that
item and for staff to create a
two way bikeway design, install
it as soon as possible and
ideally with concrete. Because
again, this is a highway off
ramp and a highway on ramp where
someone walking was killed not
less than three months ago.
Thank you. Thank you. Are there
other comments on the consent
calendar last the currently
severed items. My name is scott
brockman and I'm here in support
of consent calendar item 10.2. I
I have been advocating for this
limited street closure of elm
street for almost four years. It
struck me as a simple way to
create more outdoor space and
increase street safety in the
tenderloin. But even in the
first year of the pandemic, when
so much effort was put into
creating ways for people to get
outside safely in other parts of
the city, it turned out to be
impossible to close this one
block of a small alley, not
impossible to do, just
impossible to get done. It was
not until the community demands
that resulted in the tenderloin
community action plan and strong
support for it in the
participated three budgeting
process that the simple project
gained traction of course, it is
odd that it's taken so long. A
few years back, the national
association of city
transportation officials
proposed such closures adjacent
to schools as part of a pandemic
response and recovery strategies
. Their estimated timeline for
one of these school streets was
as days or weeks to plan and
hours to implement it. But here
we are today. I hope you'll
agree that reimagining how elm
street can be used is the right
thing for the neighborhood. And
specifically the 300 children
who attend tenderloin community
school. Thank you. Thank you for
your comment. Any other speakers
in the room. Good afternoon,
commissioners. I would like to
request to pull item 10.2 a off
of a consent calendar. It was an
informational item that was
discussed on the OCTOBER 17th
and I was told that we can pull
it off consent for further
discussion and public comment.
Appreciate it. Okay. Any other
commenters in the room seeing
none, please open a remote at
this time. We'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should star three to
enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
first speaker oh, excuse me. I
meant to speak to the delay to
extend the parking meters and
not do this during the holidays,
so I'm sorry, my hand was still
up, but I was next to speak.
Thank you very much. Please
think of the folks. Bye bye.
Thank you. Next speaker. Hello.
Good afternoon again. This is
barry toronto. I want to point
out that most of the items in do
not go through engineering.
Hearing the bimonthly
engineering hearings that are
held on friday mornings. So I'm
concerned that these items were
not vetted properly with the
public before they appeared on
the on the consent calendar. I'm
very disturbed by that,
especially the ones involving
marin street and cesar chavez
and kansas. Those did not get
through a proper vetting through
a public hearing. Second,
regarding the treasure island, I
cannot comment on any of those
changes because I go to treasure
island with passengers or pick
up maybe once every two months.
So I'm not able to accept that.
I think I hope you vetted it
properly and proper outreach
with the people who already live
there at treasure island. If
not, you should you should at
least ask staff to provide
proper feedback on what a proper
what the feedback was from from
the outreach meetings, if you
held any and last but not least,
is the let's see the here is
that the I'm concerned about the
stop sign putting on potrero
excuse me on connecticut at 26th
street. It's an uphill a very
steep hill. And I'm not exactly
sure that forcing a bus to stop
at a stop sign there going up or
down the hill would be efficient
or would would be meet the
safety purposes necessary. So
question putting a stop sign
there at on on connecticut at
26th street. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Next speaker.
Hi my name is michael howley.
I'm calling to also request that
you sever item 10.2. Be that
area of bayshore is a really
confusing and frankly terrifying
place to bike through,
especially if you've just
emerged from the hairball, which
is better than it used to be,
but still very confused and not
very pleasant on a bike. And the
bike route, as is, dumps you
into oncoming high speed truck
traffic. So I think this item
should be separate and as
previous commenters stated,
discussed as a two way protected
bike lane to connect to the
southeast corner of the city,
which is extremely neglected in
a lot of ways, not not least of
which is how difficult it is to
get in or out of that area on
foot or by bike. Thank you.
Thank you. No additional
speakers. Okay. So we've
received through public comment
two additional requests. So we
will sever 10.2 a and b, but
I'll go ahead and do a vote
first on the consent calendar
minus 10.2 a, b, r, a and b, b.
Is there a motion from the board
on the majority of the consent
calendar? First, so moved on the
balance. Okay, great. Please
call the roll on the motion to
approve the consent calendar
with those noted items removed.
Director hemminger a hemminger.
Director henderson. Hi
henderson. I director hinsey. Hi
kinsey. I director. So I. So I
director kahina. Hi kahina chair
ekin ekin. I thank you. The
consent calendar is approved.
Okay, so we'll just go in order.
I'll take now ten point 2aa the
class four bikeway on church
street. It is there any
discussion from the board on
this item? And if not, we'll
open it to public comment for
anyone in the room on 10.2 a the
church street class four bikeway
.
Hey board members. Luke
bornheimer I didn't really
prepare for this one as much,
but I ride through this area
quite often. I appreciate
staff's work on it. I think that
this area would be a great
opportunity and MAY be out of
scope for this project right now
. But to create a full sidewalk
level pedestrian plaza that also
has a sidewalk level bike lane,
the project team has been doing
a great job to make the best of
what they have with the
materials that they have access
to. But I think there's a really
great opportunity to make that
section of church street a
really great space as a transit
plaza. Tons of people walking
there, tons of people biking
there, tons of people taking
transit there, and a bunch of
businesses that would benefit
from a really robust pedestrian
plaza that just has muni going
through it. And this is
unrelated to the bikeway. But I
will point out that the transit
only lane on church street
between market and 15th is
regularly ridden through by cars
regularly like 1 to 2 per light.
So something to make that stop
would be great. Thank you. Thank
you. Other speakers on 10.2 a.
At least have theead. Good
afternoon again, commissioners.
Ty bash. Recently this board has
voted to disallow a right turn
from market street onto church
street for commercial vehicles
that will be oops, I have this
thing upside down, this turn
right over here. The
justification was a conflict
between pedestrian boarding the
southbound church and busses and
commercial traffic actually,
this conflict was identified to
be so severe that in 2020,
making a left turn onto church
from market as well as crossing
market street from the north for
non commercial vehicles was
outlawed. So today going down on
church street there's really
only one way to go is driving
south on church street which is
a street that actually dead ends
a block away. It's very
difficult to navigate at this
intersection going down on
church now, on the flip side,
sfmta is looking to implement a
class four bicycle of south
bound bike lane on the block,
which crosses the path of travel
for muni riders and is just
inches away from sfmta platform.
That is going to be and is being
claimed to be heavily used by by
muni riders. Let me bring that
up.
during the OCTOBER 17th meeting,
MR. Rhodes shared with you the
plans and stated church street
is not a designated bike route,
so why are we designating a
class four raised bike lane
where human powered and electric
bikes and scooters traveling up
to 25mph, just inches away from
unassuming muni riders waiting
for the j church in the 22 bus
or inches away from the proposed
public plaza and dining space.
Okay that's ime. Thank
you. This makes absolutely no
sense. Thank you for your
comment. Are there any other
speakers on 10.2 a in the room?
Seeing none, please open a
remote at this time we'll move
to remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment on this item.
10.2 a should dial star three to
enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. No
speakers. Okay close public
comment. Is there a motion on on
10.2 a. I will move the item. Is
there a second? I'll second.
Please call the roll on the
motion to approve item 10.2. A
director heminger heminger
director henderson. Henderson.
Director kinsey a kinsey I
director. So I. So I director
kahina a kahina ekin I icon. I
thank you. That item is approved
moving on to item 10.2 b. Got it
. Okay. Public comment for
anyone in the room on 10.2 b
this is to establish a class for
bikeway. This is bayshore
boulevard, class four bikeway on
bayshore for that. One speaker
has already commented on. Okay.
Seeing no speakers in the room
on this. One yes. Sorry deputy
city attorney susan
cleveland-knowles. I think in
the future going forward, when
someone asks to sever an item
that should be the end of their
public comment and then they
would get public comment at this
opportunity because that didn't
happen today and we didn't
notify the speaker. I would
suggest giving him additional
time today. But going forward,
it would be better to group the
substantive public comment at
the time. The item is heard.
Thank you for clarifying. Go
ahead. Thank you so much. I'll
keep this very short. Luke
bornheimer, the one additional
thing I would add is that as the
other caller mentioned, you're
coming out of the hairball when
you're coming southbound because
of the curb cut, you are
actually then forced to ride
east toward the oncoming cars to
then come back out into the
street and people are crossing
each other very closely on
bikes. And it ends up being
conflicts there as well. So it'd
be great to see actually that
sidewalk and crossing be
upgraded so that it's either
just a raised crossing to this
bikeway or just cut a new ramp
that allows people to come off
the ramp and not have to ride
directly into car traffic. Sorry
if I'm not preventing a good
visual. Thank you. Thank you.
Any other speakers in the room
on 10.2? Be if none, please go
to remote at this time we'll
move to remote public comment
not to exceed a total time. Ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment on item 10.2
be should dial star three to
enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. No
speakers. Okay, we'll close
public comment. Directors
director hemminger please. Maybe
first if I could ask lou, could
you put your graphic back up? I
think be helpful for all of us
to see something visual and I
had a question for the city
traffic engineer. Are city
engineer, whether you're
familiar with this location and
whether you're satisfied with
what we've come up with.
Ricardo city traffic engineer I
will present talia leong, who's
the project manager for the
hairball project, so she can
answer questions about the
details of this project.
Obviously I'm not satisfied with
the condition like it's a
situation that we've, we've
struggled in the past to
address. But I'll defer to staff
on, on the details of the
project. I do want to clarify
that there was a statement made
that the this item had not had a
public hearing on a friday. This
is the public hearing for this
item. And that was in the agenda
as a as a hearing that was
posted for the board to hear
this item. Thank you. Just give
me a minute while I pull some
grp that might help. And
director henderson, is your hand
raised on 10.2 be as well? Yes.
Okay great. Okay.
Okay. Just to explain the item a
little bit, because I know it's
a little bit confusing. We've
been working on improving what's
in the hairball for a while now
as we can and looking at what's
actually feasible out there
given how complicated the
hairball area is where cesar
chavez, potrero and bayshore all
come together underneath the 101
overpass. So it's a very just a
lot of utilities, etcetera, a
lot of conflict areas. And it's
also a really important area
where pedestrians and bikes
cross from the east side to the
west side, from the bayshore
into the mission, into downtown
and vice versa. So it's a really
important place to make these
improvements and we're doing
everything that we can given the
resources that we have and we're
starting with some of the things
that you see here and that are
on the consent calendar. And
they include, you know, paint
and post improve joints and some
concrete that's protecting those
bike lanes. So I will also mark
will go into some details in
just a second in terms of that
portion of bike lane that luke
brought up. But those the class
four bikeways that are proposed
are protected by concrete rail.
So they are protected by
concrete from traffic. This is
this is the beginning of what
we're trying to do here. We are
also working with public works
on a long term plan for this
area to do more concrete
changes. But those just require
a lot of detailed design and
coordination with public works
and utilities to be able to do
even the smallest things here
because of how complicated this
area is. So I just want to note
that we have been looking at
this at a high level for a while
and looking at everything that
we can possibly do to make it a
little bit better and safer. So
I will this is the list in just
sort of layperson language of
all the things that are
happening as part of what you
see in the agenda. But we also
have some drawings that explain
that particular area that luke
brought up. So I will pull that
up and then mark can talk to the
class four bikeway section.
Three yeah. Can we? You know, I
hate to say it, but the, the
photograph is a lot more
instructive. An interesting
right. I can never read a plan.
I mean there's while they're
working to bring up the detail
let me speak to this from a
larger policy perspective. This
board has previously directed
staff to move quickly, including
in light of the loss of 40% of
our capital budget. As a result
of the loss of prop eight two
years ago. We found this to be a
really successful strategy in
order to help us leverage
outside capital money by working
incrementally and quickly in
order to move towards the ideal
solution with many quick low
cost steps along the way, we
still like what's out there
right now is completely
unacceptable. The design
proposed by staff is far from
perfect, but but we believe it
helps us advance our goal, which
would otherwise be impossible
given our capital constraints.
Hi everyone. Jeff but the
testimony we're getting and if
it's accurate that what users
are actually doing with the
current design is doing a wrong
way, I mean, don't we have to
find some way to frustrate that?
So that that's not what's
occurring out there? Yeah. So
the I mean, I'm familiar with
this area as well and that's
exactly how I bike through it.
And again, I would love to
provide an actual path solution
on. We just don't have the means
to build that right now. Again,
could I just have the photograph
back? You know, these dueling
graphics really don't help the
cause because I thought the
point that luke was making was,
is there something on the
sidewalk we could do? Could we
take that plug out of there?
Could we get the sign out of
there? Yeah yes. And those are
those are exactly the solutions
that we're trying to move
towards. But again, removing
that fire hydrant is far more
expensive than we have the
resources to do and would take
years longer. So again, what
we're trying to do is to do
something in order to put the
resources together and develop.
We even know if it's an active
plug, it's a it's a high painted
as and there's also pga or
utility poles. Um, MAY I I'm
sorry to get out of whack here,
but so, so along the chase
center, you know, I think I
remember seeing bike lanes that
go both directions. Is this a
possibility we can implement
similar type of configurations.
So then instead of encouraging
only one directional traffic and
then the other side needs to
have haphazardly, you know,
hovering over pga power pole and
fire hydrants. So again, that's
exactly our goal for later. Once
we have resources. But in the
meantime, we're trying to move
incrementally as quickly as we
can afford to do so. So moving
moving towards that ideal
solution would require that we
cancel this project and come
back to you at least a year from
now as part of the active
communities plan process in
order to move forward with
anything and what we believe
again is that by moving quickly,
we using cheap material oils and
admits highly imperfect design,
it helps us to establish the
case for getting outside funding
in order to move forward with
well and a better. I think we're
all on board on that. The
question here is there there's a
trade off posed here, which is
if you want to do the halfway
measure here, you've got to live
with people going wrong way on a
facility. And I'm not sure
that's a choice we want to make.
I mean, the first rule for
doctors is do no harm. And I
think that's the question being
raised by by this design. If
it's essentially encouraging
illegal use of the facility, we
well, I'll let staff speak to
that. I feel firmly that this
accepts the existing behavior
and makes that behavior far
safer and more comfortable than
the current condition does as we
work to identify funding in
order to solve it fully. That
right turn there is going to
where is that going to 101 or
going into a city stree
going to bevmo. O it's going to
the to the oh, it's yeah, just a
street. How about you answering
that question? Yeah. Soe can
just walk through. I think it's
exactly as director tomlin said
it's understanding that there's
existing behavior and trying to
make it as safe as possible
while there is a essentially by
the way, marin is a city street
and it goes right into the dpw
yard right there. The issue with
making this a contraflow, two
way contraflow lane here is that
there is a pinch point at gerald
where the lane really narrows
down to nine feet. And then we
have a conflict issue. But I'll
let mark walk you through that
real quick. Um, hi, everyone. So
up on the screen is our proposed
design. It shows that one way
protected bike rail. And as you
can see when you're on bayshore
itself, you have a pretty
generous nine foot wide lane.
And then a pretty generous
buffer. But as you go southbound
towards gerald, it starts to
tighten because of the slip lane
that's there. You have an
adjacent 11 foot lane. You
continue point to where you
saying, sorry, this is really a
this is not really a user
friendly graphic here. Yeah um.
Yeah. So if you see where the
cursor is on bayshore itself,
you have a nine foot wide bike
lane with a I think it's a eight
foot wide buffer, but as you
move south towards gerald, where
the cursor is now, the bike lane
is nine feet. But then you don't
have a buffer anymore because
you have a travel lane for that
slip lane. So because of that,
we run out of space to have an
adequate buffer and it becomes
tight for two two way cyclists
to maneuver on that area,
especially as we have the
southbound bicyclist crossing
gerald, because that's the path
that they would use. They'd have
to get onto that median right
here, this pork chop island. My
cursor is at. And right now the
curb ramps are not aligned.
They're kind of skewed. And so
it makes it difficult to make a
turn if you're going southbound
as a bike or towards gerald as a
bike. And having to make a right
to cross the street as well as
watch out for oncoming traffic
that's coming through that slip
lane. So we felt it got really
tight in that area and that to
put a two way would not be
intuitive for those who don't
bike here regularly. So for them
to end up at that point and not
know how to cross gerald going
southbound wouldn't make sense.
And that's why we decided to
make it a one way right now. You
do have the sidewalk so you
won't have northbound bicyclists
on the sidewalk. You'd only have
southbound bicyclists and that's
six foot wide sidewalk shown and
it'd be protected with rail
compared today where it's just
sharrows, it's class three, you
would call it. So it does
provide separation between
vehicles and bikes as they cross
through here. DR. Henderson, did
you have a question. I remember
that there was some quick build
projects that were happening on
bayshore, but this is not part
of that. This is a completely
different. Okay. And okay.
So sorry, were you finished? Did
you have more questions? Okay
okay. And we have closed public
comment. Kent do we have
additional questions from board
members? I did have a question
in similar to I missed staff's
facial expression when they
responded to director henderson.
Um, so this is not part of the
bayshore. Quick build project or
is it? It's not part of the
bayshore. There are two separate
projects, separate. Mm. Okay and
does the bayshore quick little
project. I'm assuming it's
roughly this way. That's, that's
already constructed, right. No
wait I'm just trying to see if
there's similar project
boundaries. Yeah, that's
correct. The bayshore quick
build project has already been
installed. This is. Okay. Um I
think I'm done for now. Thank
you. Please. Sorry, I don't bike
in this area, so I'm just trying
to really grasp the experience
of somebody traveling southbound
and trying to understand where
they're coming from, how they're
connecting and how they're going
into gerald or not going into
gerald, perhaps still going on
to bayshore. Um, if you could
walk us through that a little
bit just so I can that could be
better illustrated for me and
possibly members of the public.
Like, are they coming from marin
coming down? Like, how, how are
they getting south? Sure I think
pulling up google street view
might be a that would be
wonderful because that's what
we've been doing. Like chair
ekin and I have we have our
google maps up and running right
now.
So it's a terrible experience.
It sounds like it doesn't sound
fun at all. Why is it called the
hairball? Why is it called the
hairball? Because it literally
looks like a like a terrible,
like wonderful. Oh, I see. I see
. That mike's on. Can you just.
You can talk from that mike. You
can use that lower mic if it's
more helpful. Oh, okay. Does it.
Oh, great. Perfect. Okay, so up
on the screen, I have a aerial
view of the location in
question. So this is the
intersection of bayshore and
marin and basically the bike
movement today that happens is
you have northbound cyclists
coming from bayshore or
approaching marin crossing this
crosswalk and then getting onto
this sidewalk. That's considered
a shared use path for
pedestrians and bikes. And then
conversely, southbound
bicyclists come from this same
path going southbound and get
off on this little curb ramp
here. It's kind of hard to see
from aerial view, but there's a
curb ramp here and then cross
along this crosswalk here and
continue south on the sidewalk.
And that's the bicycle movement
today. Got it. And from this
from that sidewalk, how do they
end up connecting with the bike
path, going southbound? What's
their route of travel? How do
they transition out of that?
Yeah. So as they continue down
south on the sidewalk, they go
around this curve approaching
gerald, which is right over
here, the slip lane. This is the
intersection of gerald. And
there's another ramp on here
that they get down on and they
cross across his bike, across
this crossing through this pork
chop island and then through
this crossing again over here
where there's these green back
arrows and then continue on.
Gerald eastbound or south.
Eastbound, yeah. And this
project or this item wouldn't do
anything to change that
behavior. Yeah so that behavior
would still happen. It's only
just to protect the northbound
cyclists that are going through
this through. Gerald right now,
if you're coming from gerald and
you're going to go along,
continue north and you see how
this bike lane kind of drops
off, you see the green drops off
and it turns into a right turn
pocket. So the proposal is to
convert this right turn pocket
into that nine foot bike lane
with a eight foot buffer
protected by concrete rail so
that we can continue that bike
lane from gerald up to marin.
And into this into the path that
people use today. Okay. Thank
you. This is super helpful. Um,
an and if I understand this
correctly, this is the first
phase of it seems like a more
involved project. Do you have an
approximate timeline for that
second phase? Yeah so there is a
second phase, but I'll leave it
to talia to give you the update
on timeline. Sorry, this is a
team effort. It, it's all good.
Yeah. So we are in the process
of starting detailed design on
our long term work here and
that's something that will go
through public works to get to
100. Then we are going to be
looking for funding for the
capital improvement. So it's a
ways out which is why we are
aiming to get some of these near
term improvements in sooner.
Okay. So can I just jump in? I
see you in the queue, director.
So, but just related to that,
can you just help us understand
we know this is a pattern that's
happening. Even the director
admits this is the path of
travel he takes. Is there
nothing we could do in a near
term quick build fashion that
could address and provide a
safer treatment for those
heading southbound and then is
that larger capital going to
address the problem and how this
is given in the pinch point? At
gerald, we deem this the safest
option to do right now in terms
of make making sure that folks
don't get to another conflict
once they're going southbound
and they get to gerald street.
So, yes, I would say it's the
safest option that we have right
now on the table to just be able
to get rid of that right turn
pocket and protect that stretch
of bike lane with our concrete
barriers. So that's going to be
the safest option. It's just to
protect whatever movements
happening in that area between
the vehicle traffic and the
sidewalk in the bike lane. So,
yes, that's what we're we
believe this was the best
option. That's why we brought it
in front of you today. In terms
of the long term, we have some
options as it's still being
design lined, but we have some
options for that intersection at
marin to help that crossing
because that's actually where we
see the most conflict. That's is
that crossing across from that
bike lane into the actual
pathway that goes underneath the
overpass. And that's where we've
seen a severe injury happen
before. And so we're doing some
work around creating a raised
crosswalk there and changing our
curb ramps to align properly and
some other treatments to help
with that area. And I will say
that that the long term design
is still being designed. So
there's some work to come from
that. And is the raised
crosswalk, is that a near term
project? Does it have funding?
That's part of our long term.
That's part of the long term.
Got it. Director. So. Um MAY I
ask you this question on that
stretch between marin and cesar
chavez? Early on, you described
basically from my understanding
of I get it correctly, is that
both northbound and southbound
bicyclists will be basically
crammed in that segment right.
You mean the shared multi-use
pathway? So director la kahina
was asking, explain to us how
people move around right now
with the northbound and
southbound. And you describe up
to the marin street
intersections on bayshore, but
some like I'm assuming along the
bayshore boulevard between marin
to cesar chavez, both northbound
and southbound bicyclists will
be using the same space right.
Currently I'm asking currently
what the correct currently
that's what that's what happens
both northbound and southbound
bikes use that space on the
sidewalk as a shared use path to
maneuver through that area. Okay
and how why is that sidewalk. I
think think it's six feet
minimum. I'm not exactly sure of
the exact width and how was
what's the minimum width of our
bike lane that you design? It
depends on many factors. I guess
the minimum you can go down to
is four feet, and that's
typically if you don't have a
gutter, that's great. So the one
that in your proposed project,
right, which is that segment
between marin and gerald, which
is the next block south from
what I just asked, you're a new
bike lane is nine feet only to
northbound why can we cut it in
half if four feet for northbound
and four feet for southbound?
Because I'm going to say that I
think I really believe what luke
was mentioning. I have a child
myself and my child's school is
from preschool to middle school
and I've seen a lot more parents
are now riding these pretty big
bikes, you know, that can fit
like two kids on the back.
They're not our european fancy
version of like, you know,
skinny two wheeled. There are
there are a lot of things that
come along with it. Luke had a
really good point, like you guys
just say, they can't simply go
around these that fire hydrant
which is active sounds like it's
confirmed by you. And also the
pga power pole. So I would love
to see family that actually
feels safe on their way to
school and on their way back
home. And if we have to make a
choice with the limited
resources that we have, I think
that simply we can do is that
instead of telling people this
is only for one direction, then
we can simply make a signage to
make aware of all the cyclists
or people who chose to whatever
wheel they're rolling that they
are in this new area that we are
creating to protect, to save
lives. Everyone is aware of
that. People are now going to be
really tight and they have to
slow down. And because they're
expecting them to be sharing the
same space for north and south,
can we accommodate that? Because
it would be really confusing to
only limit it. I mean, we know
that for reality, the parents
are not going to be try to
squeeze through the building and
the fire hydrant. And then
because I really don't want to
see a kid's leg got clipped by
the wall of the building or the
fire hydrant, they are going to
be put putting them into that
nine foot wide bike lane and
that's a very generous width for
one way direction because I want
to challenge if we I want to
know, is it possible to cut that
in half? Because you said that
the minimum bike lane is four
feet and now you're creating a
new bike lane that is nine feet
wide, only one direction down.
Yeah it has to do with where it
leads to. That pinch point at
gerald is the reason why there's
not a two way bike lane. It's
not because of the width of the
space that we have. It's because
of where it leads to and the
conflicts that that can lead to.
Once it pinches down. Okay I
would like you to consider the
practicality of the reality of
how people actually are going to
use the space instead of the
pinch point on your turn radius
or whatever else. The technical
end hearing is because
practically we have a parent
sitting over there and I have a
lot of parents that I knew that
is actually traveling around
this area. Um I would love to
not seeing any kids getting
injured or any parents have to
try to haphazardly try to dodge
this new protected lane. And in
the end, actually not protecting
them. Director henzi, I see you
in the queue, but I also just
want to jump in and ask what
would it take if the board
doesn't approve this today and
we ask you to actually formalize
a space for people to move in
both directions safely, which
might involve looking at that
slip lane and whether that
should be closed off. Because
there's another way to access
bayshore anyway, we what would
it take for you to just go ahead
and do that and come back to us?
I think it just takes further
design review. We have looked at
options. There's a lot of
traffic impacts, etcetera, and
there that pork chop that you
see there has a major utility
pole in there. So we've looked
at different options to try to
get around this and we have kind
of come to this place, but we
can go back and do further
design if that's what's needed.
Have you looked at the idea of
shortening or eliminating the
slip? Yeah that was a thing that
we were looking at. The only
difficulty with that is you do
have a fire station on gerald
and they use that slip lane to
access you know, the city from
that area and it becomes
difficult for them if you close
it out because it gets pretty
tight. Around that pork chop
island. It makes it difficult to
make that turnaround it so the
slip lane provides fire access
in the event of an emergency. So
we did float that idea of either
calming down traffic through
that slip lane or closing it out
. But we were at a standstill,
essentially. We've been through
our internal coordination with
fire and other entities to try
to come up with the best
solution on. And someone
mentioned before, there's a lot
of things we end up grappling
with. And so we get to this
place where we try to present
the best solution. An and that's
that's where we are. But if we
can depend on what's needed, go
back to the drawing board and
see what else can be done. Okay
director hennessy had her hand,
but did you take that away? I,
um, I think you sort of answered
my question, but I'll try anyway
to see if it elucidates anymore.
Um I think I was going to ask a
version of the question. Chair
you can already tried, which is
i think we're on board with the,
um, the protected bikeway north
bound, but I just want to know
if we, we thought we thought
about and I'm sure you have
again, you think you entered
this, but if we tried quick
build approaches for the
southbound, um but possible
protect lane that are public
comment or brought up. Yes we
did look at the possibility of
making that two way again on the
issue that has come up has been
the pinch point at gerald and
the. Lack of ability to do much
with that slip lane. Therefore
that's where we ended up where
we are today. Um, we, we in
thinking about what we could do
quickly to just make our
existing pattern safer. This is,
this is where we are and we know
that we can remove that right
turn pocket and create a good
amount of space there protected
by our buffer as a way to, to
take what's existing today. And
add as quickly as possible and
as vetted internally. As much as
we can make something better. So
that's how we ended up with what
we have today. We did look at
all the different possibilities.
Okay, got it. Um and then I
guess for MADAM City attorney,
we, we only have the northbound
direction for us today. So we
could, in theory, take action on
it and direct staff to do
further design. Is that correct?
Thank you, director. I think
your options today are either to
continue the item for further
clarification. You know, maybe a
more fulsome staff report with
drawings or are to deny the
project with direction to staff.
You can't modify the project
today first because there aren't
we don't know what's feasible.
And second, because it's not
right. Agendized for that or you
can approve the item as
presented as well. Right. Okay
DR. Henderson. Thank you. I just
wanted to point out my question
about was this part of the quick
build is because it feels like
this is a huge artery that we
have a couple of different
projects on excuse me, to
address in the near or, you
know, to address immediately.
But it feels like because you
call it the hair ball, it sounds
like it's complicated and a mess
and I would think that we would
prioritize this in the list of
capital projects so that we
don't get satisfied by these
immediate improvements to safety
and then not really have the
long term improvements in mind
because it feels like, you know,
we can say yes to various quick
builds to improve safety, and I
support that. But we got to
figure out some. I just don't
want the timing of this to then
somehow lower the priority for
the improvements to this
particular section of the
streets and so I just wonder if
there's a more or maybe we can
hear later about about the long
term plan so that this can be
high on the list of capital
items that we address maybe
through some hopefully through
some grant applications or
something. But I just think that
we're kind of figuring out where
the hard points are and dealing
with it. And then the long term
vision just becomes out of out
of sight, out of mind a little
bit. So I don't I don't know
that there's a question there,
but that's just my concern about
this particular project. Thank
you, director henderson,
director tomlin. So to direct to
answer director henderson's
question, this is, as staff
described, they are working on
detailed design for a longer
term solution that would cost
more in capital resources than
we currently have access to. So
again, this is a short term
impact movement that is aimed at
helping us get the resources
that we need for a much, much
longer term fix. But one of the
things that I'm hearing from all
of you is that the direction
that we had heard to move
really, really quickly in order
to maximize safety of the
network to the extent that we
could, given our staff
constraints, that's and our
capital resources that we have
aired that we have, we have
moved too fast. And you would
like us to slow down the pace of
the improvements in the network
in order to bring you more up to
speed on the design details and
present some of the choices that
I think staff have resolved at
the staff level and perhaps do
spend a lot less time on rapid
expansion of the network and
instead spend more time on
fewer, more capitalized projects
that. That would get stronger. I
wouldn't characterize it that
way. I would say what I'm
hearing from director henderson
is we're we're dealing with this
particular issue right now.
We're putting attention into it.
We're trying to fix it. But as
we're hearing from the public,
we're not fixing it. So this is
the shot and if we're not form,
if we're not going to improve
safety, why are we going to
improve, improve this project? I
would say that it does improve
safety. And even for the south
bound, even even for the south
bound, because we're putting
we're replacing what is sharrows
and a right turn pocket with a
full protected bike lane
protected by concrete barriers
and there's other portions of
this that do do some
improvements in the area, but
the formal signage will still
tell people to go on the
sidewalk. Yes but I absolutely
believe that it's a safety
improvement. Please go ahead. I
think it would be the best use
of our time to continue the
item. Just to give staff ample
opportunity to explain the
project with all their designs.
And I know we tried to solve for
things right now with like
google maps and things like
that. So I just want to give
folks a fair shot to really
present the best version of this
project to this to this board
and to the public like so I
would like to formally make a
motion just to continue the item
so that folks have ample time to
explain this in more detail. I
know we have other things on the
agenda, so I just want to keep
it pushing to a second. Okay
let's please call the roll on
the motion to continue. Item
10.2 b to a future meeting.
Director hemminger hemminger.
Director henderson henderson.
Director hinsey. Hi, director.
So I. So I. Director kehena. Hi
kehena. I chair. Hi ekin. I
thank you. That is approved.
Thank you. And we'll now take
the remainder of the consent
calendar. That's I think 10.2
are a b b. Those are the class
two and class three bike lane
facilities. Is there any public
comment from anyone in the room
on these proposed street
improvements. Hi. Board members.
Luke bornheimer I'll try and
keep my comments short. We're
coming up on 2024. It is well
known that class two and class
three bike lanes and bike
facilities are just just are not
what we should be building in
cities. Never mind in like a
completely new development where
we want to encourage people to
not rely on cars and use active
transportation. An unfortunate I
think this is a good, good
example of what happens when
staff is just trying to make
things work and something gets
deprioritized and there isn't
really a hard stop there. So I
think, you know, I would
encourage you to direct staff to
make these class four bikeways
rather than class two or class
three bike routes. And I think
more broadly, I would encourage
you to establish policy that
tells staff they cannot create
anything but a class four
bikeway because otherwise what
we see and I've seen this time
and again is that projects get
watered down and whittled down
because, well, there's this one
spot where the bus needs to go
here or someone needs to park
here or a fire truck needs to go
here, someone needs to load here
and all. Always, always, always.
The thing that is cut out is the
class four bikeway or the
materials used for it. And so I
think like I think what staff
and the agency and the people of
san francisco need is you to
actually just create a policy
that says we don't do class two
and class three bikeways
anymore. We just we just only do
class four bikeways. And that's
because there's a mountain of
data that shows that this is
safer and it's better for
business and better for the
climate and better, obviously,
for people's safety. So that's a
broader suggestion. But in this
case, yeah, I urge you to direct
staff to make these class four
bikeways instead of class two
bike lanes and class three bike
routes, which are essentially
just a green splotch of paint on
a on a car lane. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other speakers in
the room? Okay. Seeing none,
please open a remote at this
time, we'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator for speaker.
Hi, this is michael howley. I
want to thank the board for
covering these items and I the
same work that takes me through
the hairball area on my bike
also takes me to treasure island
quite frequently and I don't
know how many of you have been
out there lately, but it's a
really weird hodgepodge of bike
facilities. You get some class
four lanes, nice and protected
and a really nice multi-use path
along avenue of the palms and
around the corner. It feels
great. And then suddenly you're
in a class two lane and then you
get a class four lane again and
for an area of the city that are
essentially rebuilding from
scratch, it's so weird to me
that there are already proposing
these week paint only
facilities. I know the roads on
on mccalla is item a and b are a
little weirder maybe that's
really the only option until new
paths are installed. But yeah, I
really appreciate the board
already talking about this and
how it's not really acceptable
to be proposing these totally
unprotected types of facilities
from the jump. So there's
anything you can do to fix that
here or to create policy for
future projects. Yeah, really
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
you. Next speaker.
Moderator next speaker. Oh, they
lowered their hand. No more
callers. Okay, we'll close
public comment on this item. And
is there are there any questions
or comments? DR. Kahina, did
your hand was your hand raised
for this item? Okay. Director
hemminger thank you, MADAM
Chair. And thank you for
pointing these out to us,
because I do think it brings up
a the agenda is not on there.
I'm sorry. Okay. It's still
showing 10.2 b, so they're
asking for a 10.2 r, a and b b
to show up on the screen. Thank
you for your attention to detail
. So. The policy question to me,
I mean, I had always understood
treasure island and the
redevelopment of it as this
opportunity to have a showcase
of sustain transportation. There
spending a small fortune moving
the ferry dock from the oakland
side to the san francisco side
to make that work. An and it
sounds like they're trying to
cheap out on the bike network.
Do you have a sense as let me
ask our engineer how many bike
lanes how many miles of bike
lane are they putting in and
what classes are they? I will
say, say that if there is
interest from the board to have
a more thorough presentation
about treasure island, the
development happening there and
how it accommodating bike
facilities from kind of a large
perspective rather than kind of
the discrete projects that are
being presented here. I think we
can we can work on that. I think
this is part of a plan that
staff is bringing forward to
execute what I've already
approved. Street plans for the
project. So so it is in a way
this is kind of documenting
decisions that have already been
discussed with other departments
that are not at this hearing. So
from a perspective of providing
more information about bicycle
planning that went into treasure
island, I think I would probably
defer to other staff that are
more familiar with the project
in terms of specific questions
about what's in front of the
board in the calendar. We I have
brian wu, who's our senior
engineer, that can answer
questions about specific
segments, but larger planning
questions, I would I would think
it's more fair for people that
have been involved in the
planning to address. Yeah. And
MADAM Chair, I mean, in lieu of
just going through a lot of
questions today, I would
appreciate a chance to look at
this sort of from a global
perspective and see if we find
that the, the plans that are
apparently are well advanced are
sort of headed in the right
direction. An or we're aiming
too low. Yeah. I mean, look, I'm
familiar with the streets out
there, too. Some of them like
mccullough. I mean, that's
that's that's a hairball street.
But a lot of them are like,
you're in iowa. I mean, they're
big wide streets and avenues.
And I don't know why you just
wouldn't put a class one bike
lane everywhere you look. I will
say that that there's probably a
confusion about right now
treasure island being in flux.
So there are some things that
are interim. There are some
things that are being phased in
and there are some things that
that need to go in later when
construction is completed. So I
won't say that right now either
what's being proposed or what
you see when you go to treasure
island is the final state. But
but you're saying they have a
plan that yeah, there's an
ultimate. There's an ultimate
plan for treasure island that
goes block by block and
describes the take you up on
your suggestion. So we will we
will arrange that through the
commission secretary to have a
presentation on those issues.
There are larger planning issues
that are happening all over the
city for other development
areas. I, I think if there is
concern that when staff comes
and presents the details of
those planning efforts, that we
would wish to anticipate that
earlier the like I said, most
planning that's happening now is
considered doing this
discussions such as this as part
of the planning process. But
there MAY be situations where
the planning started many years
ago. There MAY be situations
where we have to compromise. As
I know, class four facilities
are preferred in certain
situations, but if a street is
very minor, if a street is low
volume, a class four facility
MAY not be appropriate and it
MAY require additional ten feet,
20ft of right of way that could
have been used for pedestrians
or for buildings. So we want to
be mindful that the planning
that's happening be done in
concert with other needs. But at
the same time, keeping in mind
that we want to have a safe
network. And I think the but it
is an opportunity. Yes
definitely. It's not a brand new
neighborhood. It's been
definitely. But it's got a lot
of it's got good bones. But we
haven't put the flesh on the
bones yet. Yes. Any any time
that we start from scratch to
some degree, it creates an
opportunity to create the kind
of street network and the kind
of urban environment that we
want to see in in the future.
So, yes, that that I think, is
what everyone wants to achieve.
Thank you, MADAM Chair. Thank
you. Director henzi, please. Yes
yes, I would concur with
director hemminger and wanting
to take this up along with a. A
more holistic conversation
around treasure island. Um, so
to that end, is there a time
line that you mentioned a lot of
other agencies and a lot of
other moving parts here is there
a timeline that we need to
approve this by that we would
need to approve this by or could
we wait to have take this up
along with the a more holistic
conversation around treasure
island? Yes, good afternoon.
Bryant wu, senior traffic
engineer. I understand the
discussion very closely
regarding all the bicycle
facilities on treasure island
and yerba buena island as far as
urgency, I would humbly request
that at least item a be heard.
That is the portion of mccalla
road after you exit the bay
bridge east bike path. Um, and I
can explain what is on the
agenda specific likely to
facilitate a bicycle facility
fee over the next three years of
construction so that particular
item I would suggest, be heard
today and perhaps some of the
other items could be continued
to a ladder discussion on. I
think, MADAM Chair, I think
that's the direction I would
like to go. But since you
severed these items, I'll defer
to you on on how how you would
like to proceed so that the
you're saying. Aye. Aye. That's
the class three. That's the
share shared bike route. That's
what you'd like us to move
forward today for some deadline
reason. Yes that's correct.
Okay. Director tomlin. Brian,
please correct me if I'm wrong,
but aren't several of these
streets built or under
construction and aren't they all
in an adopted developer
agreement and an adopted
environmental document? I mean,
I'm wondering, does the sfmta
have any ability to change the
design design of these streets
that are already in a developer
agreement that a developer is
building? Yeah. In this
particular case, yes, you're
correct that the facilities are
in the developer agreement,
except what was on your agenda
today is an interim layout for
the street until all of the
ramps on both sides of the
islands is completed three years
from now. So what you're hearing
before you today is an interim
condition for bikes for a
bicycle facility to get the
treasure island. And how long
would that interim facility be
in place? Is that item aa only
or is that all of these items?
Okay. Yeah, that's aa only and
that would be in place for the
next three years until the west
side bridges is completed in
2025. Okay okay. Is there a
meaningful difference to hear it
today versus on DECEMBER fifth
that our next meeting? Is there
a reason not to continue this
item as well? To allow for more
background? No okay. Any other
comments or questions? Okay. Is
there a motion to continue? I
would make that motion and
include in it that it we're
continuing it to a meeting where
we can get a briefing on the
full array of bike improvements,
including the status of the
developer agreement and how much
it constrains our range of
motion. So okay, please call the
roll. I will just, just want to
note to the directors, while
you're saying DECEMBER 5th, we
are actually in full motion
already for finalizing the
agenda items on that. So I'm
very reluctant to say this item
can fall on that, given how
close we are to publishing for
the next meeting. So the
expectation, I think
realistically is that it's
actually going to be a few
meetings out in order to prepare
all the materials. I just wanted
to let you all know that. But
there is a motion and a second.
Do you want me to call? Okay,
i'll just ask my question again.
Do you mean JANUARY 16th is when
this would come? Potentially
JANUARY 16th also MAY be
FEBRUARY meetings. I see. Okay
what's the response from staff
on that timeline? With that
timeline, I would request that
item aa be heard today. I think
you'll be happy with what you
see. Can I? I'm sorry. So these
are interim strategy. I would
like to see what is the ultimate
final road condition. Say like
15 years from now. You know, of
course, because this is really
difficult, but I found myself
really challenging to see
piecemeal items and not knowing
what the ultimate goal, the true
final intent it is. But I'm
happy to see what you have today
in light of the scheduled time
constraint that you have. Thank
you. So this is strictly for
item aa and conveniently, I have
some pictures if I kno
display this, how do I switch to
the. Go ahead. Thank you so this
is the class four facility as
you are coming from oakland
across the eastern span of the
bay bridge. And you're going
through the one of two hairballs
of treasure island. You're doing
multiple loop de loops and you
have a two way facility and you
are approaching what we call the
south gate ramp. And so the
bicyclist in either direction
will ride through this class
four coming over the bridge. And
once you get past this point,
you have to go underneath this
new hair ball and we also we
have a class four facility here.
There's a traffic signal that
won't be activated for three
years until the west side
bridges project is done in. But
in the interim, we have
maintained the class four
facility both directions as you
go underneath the hair ball
until you get to this all way
stop. Oh, sorry. The west the
west construct action is
underway, right? Yes that's
correct. It'll be completed in
25. Yes that's correct. Okay. So
and at that point, you want to
have the bike lane built as part
of that project? Not quite as
part of that project. We're
creating a second class four
facility. So what you have here
today is a combination class
three, class four for the
interim condition until we can
get to class four everywhere.
That's correct. Okay so item a
is class three and class four
for the next three years until
we can make it 100% class 4 in
2025. Got it. Okay colleagues,
we have a motion and a second to
continue the item. We're being
asked by staff to move a today.
I will ask, is there a motion
from the board to move a today?
I'll move that. I'll second,
second. Okay. Please call the
roll on the motion to approve
item a director hemminger. A
hemminger. Director henderson.
Hi henderson. Director hinsey I
hinsey I director. So I. So I
director cajina. I chair egan.
No you can. No, thank you. That
item is approved 5 to 1. Okay
and then please call the roll on
the motion to continue the rest
of the items on the motion to
continue items 10.2 are and be
director. Oh, sorry. Just one
second. Director heminger
heminger. Director henderson.
Henderson I director hinsey. Hi
kinsey. I director. So I. So I
director cajina I. Karina
chehregan I iken. I thank you.
That is. That item is approved.
That motion is approved. Okay.
And I'm just going to make a
request to staff now that in the
context of the active
communities plan that we have
this conversation with this
board well in advance of the
final adoption of the plan on
how safe is safe enough and is
there a minimum safety threshold
of bicycle bicycle facilities
that this board wants included
in that plan? On to the
discussion. We've had today. I
would love to have that
conversation. And again, I want
to also have the conversation
about to what degree should we
be moving fast with with less
than perfect materials versus
moving very slow with perfect
materials, given our staffing
and our capital resource
constraints? Understand. Okay,
great. Please call item 11. Very
good directors places you on
your regular calendar for item
number 11 approving the sfmta's
2024 legislative program. Good
afternoon, chair. Ekin directors
director tumlin. We are here
today for your for your
consideration with a
presentation on the proposed
2024 legislative program. We
come to you every year around
this time with an overview of
our local, state and federal
priorities as also noting our
regulatory affairs role. This
year, our program was informed
at your request last year for
some earlier conversations with
those of you who asked for that
and had the opportunity to get
some of your input into this
process. You know, one of the
observations I would make about
this year, particularly in
sacramento, we're going into a
second year of the current two
year session, is very dynamic
election year, a lot of a lot of
things are still in flux. But I
think that we're clear in making
recommendation to you today
about where we see the emphasis
and the priorities being in the
coming year. And so the team
will give you an overview of
that. This this program was also
presented, presented to the cac
on OCTOBER 5th. And they had an
opportunity to discuss and
consider the priorities and
approved the recommended set of
priorities that you'll see here
today. Yeah, I talked about that
. So today I'm going to start
and introduce monique webster,
who is our regional government
affairs manager, and she will go
over sort of a quick high level
of what we accomplished in the
past year and then look forward
to 2024. And then joel ramos,
our local government affairs
manager, will present a high
level on local and then we have
a closing slide on our
regulatory affairs oversight.
Thank you.
There we go. Hi, good afternoon.
I'm monique webster, manager of
regional government affairs with
sfmta. And I'm going to start
out with highlighting some of
our state and federal successes
from this past year. So first, I
wanted to share with you that
our team was fully engaged in
making the case for transit
operations funding to avert the
fiscal cliff that we and many
other operators faced. This was
really our number one priority
at and as part of a statewide
coalition, we secured a
commitment in the state budget
to not only retain $2 billion
for transit capital projects
that were in danger of being cut
out, but also an additional $1
billion that could be used over
the next four years for transit
operating needs. Another notable
outcome was the successful
enactment of ab 645, which we
already touched on during the
director's report today that
authorizes the use of speed
safety cameras for the in san
francisco and five other cities.
This year. We also saw passage
of ab 361 authored by assembly
member ward that permits the use
of cameras on city owned
vehicles in order to enforce
force parking, restrict fines
and in bike lanes. Another
notable outcome is that the
state legislature acted to place
a constitution amendment aca one
on the NOVEMBER 2024 ballot and
if that is successful, it will
lower the voter threshold from
two thirds to 55% for state and
local tax increases that fund
affordable housing and public
infrastructure. Importantly
including public transit capital
projects. Finally, we secured
state funding for several
important safety and resilience
projects listed here through
both the budget process and
competitive grant programs. And
then turning to the federal
side, our team worked to secure
the political support needed to
successfully win funding across
a number of competitive grant
programs. The largest was a $30
million award for the woods and
creek bus maintenance facilities
. As. So looking ahead to 2024
for our state legislative
priorities, this is the second
year, as kate had mentioned, of
the state legislative session
that will be reconvening on
JANUARY 3rd and transit
operations funding will once
again be our number one
priority. And there will be a
number of things taking place in
that arena, including
legislation that will give the
metropolia transportation
commission the authority to
place a regional revenue measure
on the 2026 ballot and ensuring
that hard won commitments made
as part of this year's state
budget agreement are also upheld
. Making our streets safer and
reducing traffic injuries and
deaths remains a top priority to
that end, we'll continue to
defend our gains and support
efforts that encourage traffic
safety on parking, we will
support and coordinate advocacy
efforts with public parking
interest groups, other cities
and stakeholders on efforts to
make paying for parking easier
and utilizing city resources
more efficiently. And finally,
as this board knows, avs are
very dynamic area right now with
a lot of interest from state
lawmakers. We don't know what
legislative proposals MAY come
out at this time, but we have
put this as a priority to watch,
engage in and take positions as
appropriate. So now turning to
the federal side for 2024, it
again unlikely that we're going
to see any movement on big
pieces of legislation or policy
in this year. Given the split
congress. But in 2024, our focus
will be to continue to leverage
opportunity his coming out of
the bipartisan infrastructure
bill and also other federal
grant programs, plus working
with the mayor's office to
advance community project
requests to our delegation.
Soon, we'll also be keeping a
close eye on other policy
priority areas listed on this
slide and that concludes the
state and federal piece. And
I'll now turn it over to joel
ramos, who will cover our local
priorities and legislate action.
Good good afternoon, chair eken
directors direct. Tumlin joel
ramos from the local government
affairs team working under our
esteemed director kate breen.
All of my efforts are support by
my colleague janet martinson,
who had to leave today to get to
some family obligations. But
she's really responsible in huge
part for a lot of the
legislation that we see coming
through the agency for the board
of supervisors. My particular
role also serves in overseeing
the legislative side as well as
responding to constituents
inquiries and requests
pertaining to the board of
supervisors or in response to
the board of supervisors hours
and as director breen had
mentioned earlier, that work is
largely overseen by my colleague
chadwick lee, who also had to
leave to get back to that. That
very work, our work, as you
probably all well know, is
mostly around just making sure
that this agency has the
legislation it needs from the
board of supervisors. And so
there's a number of legislation
that does have to go to them,
particularly with regard to
legislation that is very high in
cost, like over $10 million and
or has contract lengths that are
over ten years. So there's a
number of pieces of legislation
that go through there all the
time. And then of course, I'm
also keeping them apprized of
various policy debates or even
I've had the pleasure of talking
with some of them regarding some
of your appointments. It's all
part of the work that the local
government affairs team does.
Some of the most probably the
most important stuff that stands
out to me from last year's work
was getting the central subway
architectural engineering
services surface segment,
trackway systems, quality
control and design integration
contracts approved through the
board of supervisors. That was
the work that would need to be
putting the finishing touches on
the central subway. It was a big
deal because it was a pretty big
amount. And people thought that
it was, you know, over and done
with. But we of course, needed
to get this through the board of
supervisors to keep going with
that work. Looking ahead, we are
planning on continuing to work
with them. Some of the major
items that I'm working with,
director kirschbaum and her team
on are like the automatic train
control system communications
based train control systems,
procurements for new the new
busses is going to be needing
their authority fauci their
approval. And then there's a
number of things related to like
the yards and the building
progress. All of that work will
be here for them and, and
assisting the agency in making
sure that everybody has what
they need to be informed on
these matters. Sometimes there's
ballot measures that come up
that we all need to be on the
same page around. There was a
recent charter amendment
proposed. This is the kind of
work that we are doing all the
time that it is keeping
everybody apprized of what each
of the entities are doing,
whether it's the local, the mta
or the board of supervisors. I
can speak at any of these on any
of these issues. Probably the
things that I would point out
are most important. Well,
they're all very important, but
so I'm not going to call out any
one of them. I would just note
that thanks to director breen
and her good efforts, we've got
the speed safety camera
implementation that's going to
take some work and actually
locating it and getting all the
authorization that we need to
implement it. I think that's
going to be a real exciting one
over the year and then of
course, we've got director
torrance still here. She's not
here. Oh, sorry. Yes, of course.
Yep. And director. For let's see
here. Yes yes, this one. Oh
moussa was not working. Yes.
Sorry. And then I was going to
say director torin also, of
course, has a lot of things that
are happening with av taxi
mobility related things. So I
feel like I'm always talking
with the board of supervisors
about whether it's scooters or
autonomous vehicles or our taxi
programs. There's just a lot of
engagement that we're always
doing with the board of
supervisors that we're here for.
So I know it's been a long
afternoon, so I'm going to keep
this brief. I'm going to turn
this over to my esteemed
colleague, kathleen salas, to
talk about the regulatory
affairs and making sure that
we're all in compliance. Thank
you. Yes I think it's here.
Perfect. Good afternoon, chair
egan and members of the board,
kathleen salas, regulatory
affairs manager here today to
talk about our state and federal
rulemaking opportunity, which I
like to call ledge program
adjacent. The rule makings are
the public process by which we
really have an opportunity to
shape the rules and regulations
that govern so many aspects of
our agency. We have staff. Kathy
broussard is an excellent job.
And you heard from her earlier
during public comment for kate,
but she helps identify the
opportunities and then we send
them out to the subject matter
experts monitor the process, the
process, collect feedback and
determine whether or not we're
going to actually public
publicly comment on something at
the state level. So the
california administration
procedures act provides an
opportunity to help us shape
those regulations that have the
force of law by the california
state agencies. So some sample
agencies that we participate in
the rulemaking are the
california air resources board,
cal osha, the cpuc, and the
department of motor vehicles at
the federal level, the
rulemaking is the policy making
process that the federal
government uses to develop and
to develop an issue new rules
and regulations. But they also
use it to amend and repeal and
repeal an existing rule when
they need to. So some sample
agencies are dot fta, nhtsa and
the federal highways
administered ation. So recent or
current rulemaking topics that
we're working on right now are
transit worker safety, some nepa
issues, amending accessibility
requirements for transportation
facilities, state safety
oversight, regulation on zero
emission forklift rule, other
things that are associated with
carb and our public transport
safety certification, training
program. So I'm happy to go into
more detail on anything or
answer any questions, but thank
you for your time. I conclude
the presentation. Yeah, that is
the presentation and we're happy
to answer questions. As you wish
, colleagues. Are there
questions for the gov affairs
team? Director henderson. Yes,
I'm curious. As I heard the word
nepa and so I'm curious what on
nepa you all are responding to
now. So we've been engaging with
dot. I mean, the realm of
environmental project
streamlining environmental
reform has been something that
we've been focused on for a
number of years. There have been
there has been incremental
progress at the federal level
around how the fact that states
like california have the
california environmental quality
act sequa and the federal
national environmental
protection act often are
redundant. And so our efforts
have really been focused at
digging in. And the
administration actually in
coming to california and
implementing the infrastructure
investment and jobs act came to
us and asked specifically if we
had recommendations, options on
how nepa and federal
environmental review could be
streamlined and that has to do
with, again, ensuring that
california's review and approval
counts, that you don't have to
do it a second time. If the
threshold is met in terms of
environmental law and something
that director tumlin has thought
a lot about, and if there are
other things that you would want
to add to that, but it's an
ongoing effort, I'd say that we
continue to look for when the
interest is, is there, as it has
been with this administration
action, including both the
gubernatorial administration
here in california, but also the
federal administration. And do
you feel like progress is being
made there? Because I know I
mean, I know it's nepa and it's
big, but I just wonder, do you
think that in incremental is
real progress or is it just sort
of I mean, I, I think so. But
jeff, I really would look to you
if you had some insight because
he's been really leading in this
space, too. Yeah, we're right
now we're focused on administrar
rule change rather than
legislative change. And
fortunately, the buttigieg
administration has been quite
interested in trying to figure
out what can we do within the
context of the statute in order
to get out of the way of good
projects. And hopefully I will
be traveling to washington in
JANUARY in order to continue
some of that work. Got it. Thank
you. Thank you for the question.
DR. Heminger. Thank you, MADAM
Chair. To subjects kate and jeff
may want to chime in on this
first one. Automated vehicles
and the statement in your
program is, is pretty broad. Yes
and I wonder whether the program
would benefit from greater
specificity. You know, on the
one side of the spectrum is how
I would characterize where we
are now, where we send strong
letters into the state and they
pat us on the head and say,
thank you very much for your
ideas. At the other end would be
giving hundreds of cities in
california veto power over who
gets to drive on their streets.
So where in that spectrum do we
want to fall? I mean, where do
we want to get to? Well, I'm
just going to tee up, jeff, by
saying that the space is
incredibly dynamic. We know
compared to a year ago, we are
seeing legislators as super lean
in on this. We have senator
cortese, who has asked for a
study. We have mayor bass, who's
gone on record along with mayor
breed, making the case for
cities interest in having access
to data. And so I would expect
that we will see something play
out. I don't know if we can
predict what that is, but yes,
and I can say just a little bit
more on this topic where we're
engaged across several different
departments and with both the
executive and the legislative
branch of government on four
parallel paths. One is a path
aimed at our regulators the most
, the state regulators, but also
nhtsa at the at the federal
level. The second is a legal
path, a third is a. What really
we think is the best path to
support the advancement of the
industry, while also upholding
the public good, which is a more
collaborative negotiated path.
And. A legal what's the fourth
one that I'm now missing?
Legislative. Oh, and of course
the legislative path. Yeah.
Which we which is an important
part. But we also want to make
sure that if any legislation
does pass that it doesn't
unintentionally incur for us.
Right? So really what we're
trying to get is industry to the
table in order to define a clear
set of public, good oriented
outcomes as along with
performance metrics and data to
support that so that. 911 calls
and twitter aren't our primary
source of performance data for
the industry. And we believe
that is that level of
collaboration and transparency
is what best supports the
advancement of industry, as well
as making sure that we have the
tools that we've got in order to
make sure that our streets still
work. Okay the second one is
about these numbers. It's in one
of the items in the report about
the contract limits we have with
the board of supervisors. And I
believe it's ten years or 10
million bucks. Did that
originate with our origination
as an agency? 20 years ago? I
can answer that if you want. No,
sorry. The those limits are
citywide and they're in the
charter for its section 9.118.
And it requires all contracts
except for construction
contracts. Contracts greater
than ten years or $10 million to
be approved by the board of
supervisors. So it applies to
all agencies, not just ours. It
applies to all agencies include
yours and specifically in
proposition an, a that expanded
the authority of the sfmta and
its board. It specifically
carved out 9.118 as something
that the sfmta is still some
object to. Well, that could be a
legislative item. I mean, do we
find those numbers and those
limits inhibiting. I know. Look,
whenever you go to the board of
supervisors, they have the
chance to say no or to say do
this instead. Yeah, I would
argue that there are many
factors that are far more
important that get in the way of
our good action and it would be
quite interesting to have a
whole session on what are the
obstacles that stand in the way
of our ability to deliver what
you want. Most of the obstacles
that we face for the delivery of
the clear values that you all
hold and that I share those
obstacles are outside the agency
and I would be happy to have a
session enumerating each of them
, as well as what potential
strategies there might be in
order to remove them as well.
And I know just from my own
personal memory with potrero and
now with the train control thing
, you know, our staff is
building schedules around the
fact of when the board of
supervisors was has an election
on and that's not the best way
to run a railroad. So look I'd
be willing to take you up on
what you suggested about things
outside of mta control if we've
got a chance of making a
difference on changing them.
Thank you, MADAM Chair. Thank
you, director kahina, please.
Yes. Thank you so much for your
presentation. I did have a
question about fares
specifically free muni for youth
as we're approaching the new
budget season, I anticipate that
fares and pricing is that's
going to be a factor that comes
up for us. So curious on the
state level, I believe at a
previous briefing I had with the
team, you all mentioned, I think
it was ab 19, 19 or 1 of those,
there was another one this year
to 1802, withholding,
withholding. Holden continues to
come back and try, but so far
but let me correct your
question. So exactly. I was
going to ask you if you could
just let members of the public
know and also us like a brief,
like just description of what
the appetite is, right now in
the state to support that type
of support for transit agencies
to offer that that resource for
community members is where some
of the blockages that you're
seeing. Is there anything that
we could do perhaps to our
people power to leverage to
support something like that? You
know, I mean, my reflection and
I don't have jeff or monique
would want to add something is
that it falls within that larger
conversation about transit
agencies going over the fiscal
cliff. Right? And so we have
relied on a huge coalition of
partners, including partners
from community based groups that
have supported free transit for
youth free transit in different
forms, but that that tension is
still there. Right. And so if we
can't identify ongoing,
permanent, stable, predictable
sources of revenue to support
transit operations, it becomes a
trade off exercise. And whether
you're going to fund programs
like that through reductions in
service or make other changes
that are going to impact what
you're putting out on the
street, that is the service that
people rely on. That is the
dynamic of that conversation. It
hasn't led to, I would say, in a
positive way. It hasn't led to a
splintering within the coalition
that can continue to advocate
for public transit in general
and in particular for transit
operations funding. I think it's
also really important to remind
ourselves that going into the
second year in sacramento, we
are not guaranteed need. What
was promised to us in last
year's budget. That is what
we're talking about as saving us
and giving us a longer runway.
We still have to fight in the
face of an increasing state
level deficit to keep those
funds that were already acted
upon last year but have to be
reacted upon in this year's
budget. Right. So you know, I
think assembly member holden
will take another pass at it. I
don't think he's giving up and
within the context of the
california transit association,
there is interest out there. But
I think you would see a dynamic
that is coming more from the
budget perspective than it is
necessarily from from the policy
perspective of, of free transit
is a good thing. Jeff, please.
Yeah and I would add to that,
one of the strategic things that
we're trying to do is to set up
the conditions for expand the
tent as big as we can get it in
order to fight for our stronger
state support for transit, just
as has already happened in new
york. And so whether it is our
free transit free muni program
or our advocacy for bay pass
through clipper, our advocacy
for clipper 2.0 and the tools
that that offers and our
advocacy for the california
integrated transportation
program pilot, which will
dramatically streamline our
ability to means test everything
. We're trying to put the tools
in place that invite more and
more and more people into the
tent to acknowledge that transit
is essential tool and it has to
be funded. And in any normal
country around the world, it
would be funded largely by the
state and federal governments.
Yeah. So if holding does
succeed, are there local levers
that we could start pulling to
figure out a way to support that
program? So I've heard in
multiple occasions different
supervisors and different folks
say like, we're happy to provide
advice, we're happy to provide
other sources of funding to
support this because transit is
essential. And folks, I think
there's alignment on that, that
piece of it at least. So
wondering if there's, you know,
if that's an avenue we've
explored or if we've had some
success there. I mean, are you
asking a question about what
should happen at the state level
or is it more at the local
level? Well, if the state
doesn't meet us, where we need
to be to do that, what's the
plan b? Is it local then at. And
so that I would kind of defer,
if I can on just fare
integration and our overall fare
policy conversations that we
have. I mean at the state level,
san francisco is really looked
to as a model for the free and
transit programs that we offer.
I mean, one of the probably
among the most robust in the
state. But I think that if we
keep hammering on the same
approach, which is just put more
money into free programs versus
the approaches that that
director tumlin just outlined
that are more comprehensive,
like the cal itp, which ties you
to a family of programs so that
you know, you can benefit not
just from discounts on your on
your utility bill, but also
qualify for free transit. I
think those are going to have a
better chance at success in my
mind, maybe not a great answer,
but that's kind of where I see
the. Yeah, yeah. It's a great
perspective. Thank you for that.
Yeah, thanks. Seeing any other
questions from my colleagues? I
just had maybe 1 or 2, but I
can't believe this is our last
conversation. Like this with
you, kane. Maybe you'll have to
come. Come crash the
conversation next year. So it's
very broad and all encompassing
in order by design to give you
flexibility to be opportunistic.
And, you know, when everything's
a priority, nothing's a
priority. So I just wondered if
you might kind of help us
understand what are like the
true priorities your staff will
be prioritizing in the next year
. Yeah. Is it I mean, can we
interpret it's like the number
one on the list. Number one of
the categories is funding. Yeah
I mean, I think what we try to
do because you were very clear
in like in the 32nd elevator
speech, what's our top 3 or 4,
right? And so at least if we're
talking about sacramento, we
have those things listed here,
which are, again, transportation
funding. Right? I think we're
going to be spending you know,
if it's a pie, a lot of that pie
is going to be in that space
because of the conversation
around the potential for a
regional measure, because of the
whether there's going to be
legislation that would help or
need to bridge some road to a
future regional measure. There's
conversations around that that
were teed up by senator wiener
in the context of bridge toll
bills. There is a lot going on
around that. And a lot of
parties involved in that
conversation from advocates in
the region, including spur bay
area council transform a lot of
the social justice advocacy
groups are also at that table
along with transit agencies.
Cmas and mtc. So we have to be
in that conversation. Director
tumlin is fully part of those in
the leadership context, and then
we're supporting that at the
staff level. I just think
realistically that's going to
take that's going to be a lot of
work. Vision zero. I mean, the
four things that are listed
here, right? Transportation
funding, vision zero, parking
payment flexibility, autonomous
vehicles, those are four things
that I think are going to rise
to the top. And that's just some
offense, some defense. I think
there's a lot of things that
happen in in the work that we do
that are defense in nature, that
we don't we're preventing harms
that we don't see, but we're
ensuring that we kind of keep
keep some of those bad policies
away from us as much as
possible. And so I do feel like
those from the on the offense
side, although avs could be both
offense and defense, I think
those are the four priorities
that at least at the at the
state level, let me be clear. I
don't want to give short shrift
to the day to day dynamics of
what happens with the board of
supervisors that joel and jeff
and julie and others are
managing constantly. Yeah. Okay.
And then just maybe my last
question is just on vision zero.
Given like you talked about,
like the two big priorities got
done thanks to your leadership.
We also know that those two were
compromises and they were sort
of minimized for maybe our ideal
version of both of those bills
in order to get across the
finish line. So I just wonder
how you think about those things
given vision zero is still a
priority going forward for the
state and the years and years it
took to get these things done.
Is this something that you think
about as like the next 2.0 of
these things or like studying
and learning? Of course, we
haven't implemented the speed
safety cameras, but we know 33
is not nearly enough to cover
the city. I guess if you can
help us how you're thinking
about that. Yeah, I mean, I
think our large city dot
coalition, which jeff is the
chair of, really keeps vision
zero at the front of our kind of
mutual interest in california.
Right. And so if you were to say
four years ago, vision zero
people were like, what
skepticism are we really? Do we
really have a speed problem?
we're in the present moment. I
think we've brought people along
on that journey. I think we've
had incredible support, frankly,
from the federal administration
who has embraced safe streets
for all and all of those sort of
agendas that we need to support
policy work. In addition, the
ntsb, which supported us on
speed safety cameras, has
brought its voice to new
technology known as speed
governors. And we have interest
amongst some of the folks that
we're talking to as a tool, a
technology tool that could be
explored. It's something that
new york is looking at, and it's
the kind of technology that
could be used in different ways,
whether it's on municipal
fleets. As a pilot or exploring
opportunities that might have
benefits for insurance. As you
know, the insurance you pay if
you're a driver and you
volunteer to put a speed
governor. So those are some of
the tactical or specific
proposals that are out there in
the vision zero space. I don't
think we're ever going to end
that work, right. I mean, we
know it's aspirational, but
there are specific things that
fall under that umbrella that I
think we're going to be
advocating for. This year. Thank
you. Yeah, no further questions.
I'll go to public comment on the
legislative program for this
year from anyone in the room
seeing none, please open a
remote at this time. We'll move
to remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderate later for
speaker. Hi this is barry
toronto. I don't know how I'm
doing it, but I seem to be the
first speaker on the list, so
appreciate it. A couple of
things I noticed in your report.
The report that there's a
possibility ben-dahan reform
next next year, or a proposal
from kate turin and their staff.
It would be great if it would
make sure that it was vetted
first properly with the industry
and that any objections or any
feedback from the industry be
shared with you in advance of
any proposal that would go
before you so it would be
appreciative that that you made
sure the industry was completely
involved and not just given
perfunctory presentation. The
next thing is, I urge you to ask
your state legislators. To
actually what do you call
provide more regulation on on
the tnc. As you can see, the
state puc failed to understand
the impact of autonomous
vehicles on the on the san
francisco society as a whole.
And look, the dmv ended up
suspending the license of crews
and so the state puc is not to
be trusted concerning our
electricity bills are going to
go up many fold in in the next
year. So it would be
appreciative that you include
that in your priorities is to
get some legislative relief by
allowing cities and
municipalities and counties to
have some regular authority over
tnc and also define last but not
least, to find some money, some
debt relief for the purchase
medallion holders who actually
have hired us divided as the
taxi community between those who
get to work the airport and
those who don't get to work the
airport and the price and the
huge price break between the
cavs that can operate only in
the city and those that can also
operate at the airport. So it'd
be great if you include that in
your legislative agenda. Thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you. No additional
speakers. Okay. We'll close
public comment. Is there a
motion to approve the
legislative program? So moved
second. Second, let's call the
roll on the motion to approve
director heminger heminger.
Director henderson henderson.
Director hinsey. Hi, director.
So I. So I. Director kahina. Hi
kahina. I chair ekin. Hi. You
can I thank you. That item is
approved. Thank you. Thank you.
Please call the next item places
you on item number 12
presentation and discussion
regarding a muni ford program
update.
Yeah okay. Well good afternoon,
directors. Almost good evening.
So sean kennedy, I'm the senior
senior manager for the transit
planning group here at the mta.
Last month I talked through a
service update and including
some great news that we had seen
the highest ridership we had
seen in the system in four
years. So I still want to want
to want to give those kudos, but
this time I'm going to focus on
some capital projects
specifically our muni ford
program. Also have some great
news to share and instead of
burying the lead, I'll tell you
right now on the on the opening
slide, that muni ford program is
turning ten years old in a
couple months. Amazing that we
are ten years old, which means
I'm ten years older and I
definitely show my age. But
super excited about that. And
even more importantly than that,
this body has now approved over
100 miles of transit priority
improvement projects in those
ten years. So, you know, ten
miles a year on average, that is
phenomenal and has actually made
sfmta really one of the
preeminent transit priority
programs in the country. So
really, really exciting news.
But before I get too far down
that path, I want to take a step
back and just review how we got
here. So as you guys know, you
know, san francisco has a number
of unique challenges, especially
from a transit perspective. And
san francisco is the second
densest city in the united
states. Second only to new york,
unfortunately. And unlike new
york, our previous transit
planners did not have the
foresight to endow upon us a
really robust underground
transit network and consequently
about 80 to 85% of our daily
transit riders are doing so on
the surface roads. And so you
know, there's a lot of competing
needs in this. This picture was
picked specifically to show just
about all those competing needs.
I think in one picture, it's
pretty amazing, but there's a
lot of competing needs for that
space. And consequently,
congestion plays a highly
significant role in in how the
system rolls out and how it's it
operates. S and, you know, we
can talk about and we have we do
talk a lot about what that means
from an individual person's
perspective, live on the system.
You know, delay a long time to
get from a to b, very unreliable
service. But I do want to take
two seconds to just point out
the larger systemic impact that
has on the system. This is a
pretty a pretty quick
illustration, but basically
we're trying to point out here
with this graph is that if you
just had a 30 minute round trip
line, meaning you know, took you
30 minutes to go from a to b and
then back to a so total round
trip time. And you wanted to run
a ten minute headway that would
take three busses. So the
average person on the street is
standing there and they see a
bus coming by every ten minutes
and it's costing us three busses
to run that service through
congestion or other other
friction points in the system.
If that trip time increases and
in this case, say up to 45
minutes instead of half an hour,
we're now having to put a bus
and a half, which obviously
would really be two busses on
the system and that's going to
cost us about 50% more in
operating costs. And just
pointing out that this increase
in operating costs means nothing
to the passenger. The person
standing on the street, they're
still seeing the bus just come
every ten minutes so they don't
see an increase in service. They
think it's the same, but it's
costing us 50% more to deliver
that service. And of course, the
converse is true as well. If we
can get that trip time down to
20 minutes, you know, we can we
can save a whole bus. And what
we do with that bus could be to
make it come more frequently. So
now you get 7.5 minute service
or we can save that money and
either bank it or use it on
another line in the system. So
taking that understanding, we
developed the muni forward
program ten years ago. It is a
program that's near and dear to
my heart. I came to the mta just
to implement this program at the
beginning it was me and a half
an fte and we've since been able
to grow, grow that, grow that
number quite, quite largely. But
you know have some amazing staff
and some of them will be talking
here today. But you know,
through partnership ups and
through working with the rest of
transit operations, we've been
able to deliver a lot of these
pretty amazing little tidbits
and bullets to the overall
program, including and not
limited to about 75 miles now of
transit, only lanes in the city
in large part due to our close
association with the transit
engineering group at and the
department of public works. So
we're pretty successful and
we're so successful that four
out of ten people in the last
budget budget's budget cycle
said that hey, they really want
the agency to spend more time
and more money and more
resources continuing to advance
these goals. And so here's the
map of looking forward and back
the blue lines is 100 miles that
we've already implemented. The
gray lines is where we hope to
go. So over the next the next
several years. And you know,
really shows a concentration in
the near term on on our our on
our lrv fleet or our our our
train service. And but in
general, really connecting cross
town trips throughout the city
is where we'll be focusing this
next round of improvements on in
addition to kind of these large
corridor projects. We've you
know we've gotten very good at
delivering project cradle to
grave, you know, all the steps
and pitfalls along the way, be
it technical, political, all
monetary. You know, we've kind
of delivered and figured out
ways to get around those. But I
think one of our most impressive
and really exciting things that
we've done has gotten really
good at reducing that time to
benefit ratio and getting
projects for the most part, 90%
in the ground. As soon as as
soon as this board approves
them. And getting those elements
out there, one specific one that
I'm super proud of is the l
taraval. You know, that was a
safety project with some side
transit benefits that we had 25
people hit getting off the train
on. And the five year period
before that project, we
implemented this board, approved
that project and we implemented
the quick build portion of that
work as soon as we could. And
since then we haven't had any,
any crashes on that corridor. So
super exciting and really proud
of that work. And you know, not
only have we kind of figured out
how to how to improve safety,
but people vote with their feet
and people are coming to muni
forward corridors because we've
been able to integrate service
improvements with capital
improvement points as well as,
you know, operating management
improvements like headway
management, all on these very
important corridors, pre covid,
we were seeing 15 to 20%
ridership gains on on muni
forward corridors and just as a
reminder, that was under the
backdrop of the system in
general was seen about a 3 to 4%
reduction in in transit
ridership. And that carried
through through covid, you know,
through the lane program or the
temporary emergency transit
lanes that we did during covid.
You can see on here that, you
know, the corridors where we did
muni forward and total work,
we're seeing much higher
ridership gains than we are for
system for system as a whole. So
that's just some quick overview,
overview numbers. But I'm going
to bring up michael rhodes, who
is our manager of transit
priority in general, and he's
going to walk through some
specific corridors and numbers
that we're seeing there. And
then I'll come back and talk
about where we're going next. So
with that, michael all right.
Thank you, sean, and good
afternoon directors. Michael
rhodes, transit priority manager
. I'm going to highlight some of
the programs accomplishments
over the past decade at the
corridor level. So starting with
the 14 mission corridor, since
2016, we've made a series of
improvements across the entire
14 mission route. We've added
transit lanes, bus bulbs, signal
priority, bus stop spacing
changes. We've increased rapid
and local frequency on the
corridor and we've made
pedestrian safety upgrades as
well. So as for results, we've
seen, we saw a 99% ridership
increase in the years before the
pandemic, sort of as an initial
kind of result of that. And
since the pandemic started,
we've seen a 92% recovery. We in
terms of ridership compared to
pre-pandemic levels, which is
one of the strongest ridership
recovery levels in our system,
and really especially impressive
because the 14 does serve
downtown in usually that sort of
an indicator of lower ridership
recovery. But despite that, it's
really doing great overall
travel time on the 14 local end
end has been reduced by 9% since
2015. Not just in the project
areas, but as a whole and travel
time in the soma section of the
line has been reduced by up to
31% since bus lanes were added
as part of the title program in
2021. We've also seen safety
benefits for people walking.
There's been a 33% reduction in
pedestrian injury collisions on
mission street in the inner
mission since that project was
first implemented in 2016. Next,
looking at the 22 fillmore
corridor, we've also made a
series of improvements since
2017, most dramatically, we
extended the 22 fillmore to
mission bay and created the new
55 dogpatch route. We've added
bus lanes, bulbs, islands,
signal priority bus stop spacing
changes, especially along 16th
street and on church street. And
we've made pedestrian safety
upgrades on this corridor as
well as we almost always do as
part of muni forward projects.
So some of the results so far
include a 102% ridership
recovered on the 22 and 55
combined compared to
pre-pandemic and travel time
savings of 1 to 2 minutes just
during the quick build phase of
improvements on 16th street with
we expect a lot more than that
as the full project comes to
completion in the coming months.
Of course, on geary, we've also
focused some of our most
intensive and comprehensive
improvements throughout the
entire route. So since 2018,
we've implemented transit lanes,
bulbs, signal priority, stop
spacing changes, many other
reliability upgrades similar to
the last two corridors, not to
mention some older transit lanes
that we did as part of the
original transit first policy in
1970s and upgrading with red
colorization in about ten years
ago. So we've also, of course,
made pedestrian safety
improvements, but also urban
design upgrades on geary as part
of the projects we've done. And
so some of the results for geary
looking at, you know, looking
specifically at the geary rapid
project, which is in the sort of
middle section of the line
through the western addition
japantown, we saw up to an 18%
decrease in 38 hour travel time,
up to a 37% improvement in
reliability or reduction in the
variability of travel time and
70 to 80% reduction in vehicles
going over 40mph. So on the
safety side, we really saw the
safety benefits of reducing the
roadway for general vehicles in
terms of equity by calling the
geary expressway and japantown
in western addition
neighborhoods. The project has
helped to reconnect communities
that were harmed by 1960s urban
renewal policies. To get a sense
of the scale of transit lane
expansion, in particular, that's
just one part of the toolkit
with muni forward, but it's one
of the most visible this series
of slides shows the growth of
transit lanes in the city from
2006 to today. So this is 2006,
a much more limited transit lane
network than we have out there
right now. And this is 2013. So
right before muni forward was
fully launched, there are some
new additions compared to 2006,
like adding the t-third transit
lanes along third street, but
not a ton of change. You know,
we hadn't we hadn't yet really
ramped up at that point. And
here we are in 2023 today as you
can see, there's been a huge
expansion of transit lanes over
the last decade under the muni
forward program. In fact, just
since 2020. So just the last 3
or 4 years, there's been a 33%
increase in the transit lane
network. We've also begun
colorizing many transit lanes
red as you can see here, which
increases compliance by over 50%
and this slide shows transit
lanes that are already approved
as well as some that will be. So
basically, this is everything
we've already got, plus what's
coming soon, recently approved
projects. We're continuing, as
you can see, to add many more
transit lanes in the years ahead
. And here are some of the most
recent muni forward projects
we've completed just in the last
few months. So that would
include the quick build transit
lanes on hyde street that you
just approved last month, the
geary boulevard. Quick build
improvements which are nearly
complete now, the 28 19th avenue
muni forward project, which
added transit bulbs and other
upgrades on 19th avenue, is now
substantially complete at 27
bryant muni forward project,
which also added a significant
number of bulbs and the
tenderloin and nob hill
neighborhoods, russian hill, a
queue jump bus lane for the 30
stockton on townsend street and
red transit lane colorization on
mission street in soma. So
that's just in the last few
months. Some of the projects
we've completed. And you we also
have seven projects that are
currently in the detailed design
or construction phase. So these
are projects that are already
approved but are kind of in the
detailed design or construction
phase. You can see that we
expect construction to wrap up
soon on the 22 fillmore on 16th
street. That's just about done.
And we expect construction to be
completed next year on five
fulton bulbs in the inner
richmond and the taraval muni
forward project and we expect
construction to occur from about
2025 to 2027 and beyond. On the
sort of permanent version of
some projects that already have
had quick builds. So the church
muni forward 29 sunset phase one
project and the geary boulevard
improvement project, permanent
version. So I'll send it back to
sean for the rest of it. Great.
Thank you, michael. So just what
is coming up next in the near
term? We are really focusing on
the rail system in the near
term. Michael will be coming
back up in a few minutes. We
have an info item on the m that
will be in your next item. We're
also hoping to bring forward the
k ingleside work that we've been
working closely with. Supervisor
melgar's office on ocean. We're
we're hoping in the JANUARY to
FEBRUARY time frame for that
project that and then we'll be
shifting staff resources to
those, those next five bullets
you see there. Most notably the
t third that as you know, does
have a transit line. So a lot of
a lot of dedicated right of way.
But, you know, it needs a lot of
help still. So we'll be focusing
on there. And we do also hope to
be leaning heavily on some of
our international colleagues on
figuring out how some other
cities around the world really
are dealing with the kind of
things we're seeing on the on
the t third line as we improve
that corridor and then, of
course, the j church, the
portion of noe valley is on
there and the n judah, why we're
focusing so much on the rail in
the next year, year and a half
is because we're also working
our long range arm of our group
is working on a muni metro
modernization project that's
really focusing on the subway
and, you know, we you know, the
subway will only be as good as
what's coming into it, right? So
you got to fix the subway, but
you also got to got to address
bus problems and delays and
issues on the surface as well.
So it'll all work together as as
one one system. So that leaves
us to it leads us rather to the
what is the vision and the
vision here as actually laid out
in the connect work, we call
this the five minute network.
It's really obviously a service
service vernacular, but this
really is a capital map. We are
marrying, of course, as we've
kind of been talking about the
service and the capital sides of
the house. And so while we're
talking about five minute
service on these red corridors,
that also means that the vision
is that these these these busses
and trains are only stopping at
transit stops. They're going to
be hopefully a surface level
subway is what what the vision
is. And you know, this is
obviously going to take take a
while. So that's why we're not
promising this in the next few
years. But we are going to be
advancing toward this idea,
which means we're going to be
going back to many of the
corridors that we've already
done moving forward projects on
to get even hopefully more
improvements on those corridors
and eventually reach toward this
idea of just stopping at transit
stops on these on these major
routes. So that's where we're
at. And I'd love to take any
questions or comments. Thank you
so much. Colleagues, are there
questions for the presenters. So
go ahead. See here. That's good.
This is a really great
presentation. It sounds like
it's amazing. We did a lot of
great thing and it's well
fitting, like happy
thanksgiving, you know? And I am
looking at your pie chart on
like the community priorities
for sfmta for the next upcoming
fiscal two years of 22 and
2,614. Well are you going to go
back to the slide? Yeah okay.
Let me pull it up. Yeah. So the
second highest priorities are,
you know, 14% of them identify
that personal safety for muni
riders. I would love to hear
what we have in your in your
pipeline, how we can address the
second priorities of from the
communities. That's great. So
the couple couple answers there
one from from within my group
and within my cip program we've
started a lighting program at
stops. So, you know, one of the
issues is that that people feel
when they're waiting at stops,
when it's when it's darker out,
very unsafe. It's just not a
great feeling to be in a dark,
dark locale. So we have some
money set aside in our cip.
We're doing a pilot program of
that on the line that that
michael will talk about here in
a minute. Where we're we're
practicing, we're there's not
lighting at a lot of these stops
for a lot of a lot of really
legitimate reasons, you know
dollar reasons, you know how
much is it going to cost? Can we
look at other alternatives like
like solar lighting? Can we can
we can we do things that don't
necessarily mean running conduit
, you know, five, 600ft? That
cost costs a lot of money. So we
are going to be doing this pilot
on the m line to see if there's
other ways that we can get some
lighting at stops. We also have
a bus stop program that we're
kind of brushing off all of our
bus stop signage throughout the
system. That includes a little
what we call a birdhouse on the
top of the signs that have some
ambient lighting. Not enough
lighting that you can read a
book by, but they are solar
powered and do hopefully give
off a little bit of lighting to
at least let operators know that
there's a there's a stop there
and then there's a whole nother
program that kim burris and the
safety team is working on,
trying to improve personal
safety on on the bus itself. So
there's a couple of different
levels we're working on on the
street level as well as on the
on the bus side. Thank you for
that. And yeah, I'd like to hear
a little bit more about what kim
is also in charge of doing
because it's really important
for every one of us to feel safe
in the bus and getting off the
bus. Yeah. Um, but I realized
that you and michael are more
focused on the actual
infrastructure aspect of the
muni forward project. So let me
share with you some of the
senior hours or seniors and also
a little older adult riders that
they've been telling me that
they wish that they can see the
digital sign for upcoming busses
because they are very reluctant
to take their phone out in
public these days because of the
worry of their personal safety.
Waiting at a even a very well
lit bus stop and do you have any
updates on that progress? Yes.
So I do not. Jeff, do you have
any we would be delighted to
give you. We're probably past
due for an update from our chief
of security, kimberly burris,
talking about the gender safety
equity initiative, as well as
what we're doing with
technology, with our transit
ambassadors and with our fare
inspectors. And we're probably
also due for an update on
technology, including the
replacement of all of our real
time information panels as the
first phase of that work, as
well as the next phases of that
work, which we are eager to
fund. Because not only does that
information help people who are
afraid of taking out their
phone, just the mere presence of
that information actually helps
to increase confidence for all
riders just as improvements in
speed and reliability. We hear
from our passengers a lot that
the greatest concerns that they
have have are on our lower
frequency and less reliable
lines because you're standing
there and you don't know when
the next bus is coming and
that's when our riders get very
nervous. So when you can see the
next bus coming, that provides a
great deal of reassurance for
our passengers is great looking
forward to see those
presentations. Then thank you.
Thank you. Director hensley,
please add thank you again for
this presentation. Thank you
again for the presentation.
Every your team is doing great
work. I just had a couple of
questions. Um one is not really
related to muni forward, but
it's in your purview. I know.
So, um, prior to the pandemic,
you all had like a hotspot
program for like, stop immediate
, quick build type improvements
that were less slightly less
intensive than, um, muni
forward. Um, I know your group
is very busy, but is that still
a thing? Um you did like the ten
hotspots or. Yeah I forget what
it was, but yeah, that's, that's
a great memory. Yes, we, we, we
did the ten hotspots. It was
based on just overall delay. So
you know, the muni forward
program is really focused on
where the most passengers are
and thus the most aggregate
delay. But we also wanted to
look at where just busses in
general or trains in general
were getting stuck regardless of
ridership. And it was really our
way to address some of the some
of the lower frequency, you
know, lower ridership lines,
like things like the 54, the 52,
the 37. And so we did the
initial top ten list. Those have
all been implemented. Those
those improvements have been are
on the ground now. And we are in
the process right now of
developing a next or another top
ten list that we will be taking
up in this in this fiscal year
coming up. So that program is
ongoing and then there'll
there'll be more on that'll be
also more on the community lines
. Yes, long lines. I'm assuming.
Okay, great. And then michael's,
um, sort of timeline slide
inspired a question for me is
these larger sort of capital
projects that we're approving
along with a quick build phase,
are like are the capital
portions of those projects, are
they funded or or are you still
looking for funding for those
all of those projects on that
slide are funded? Okay. We, you
know, detailed design just takes
takes a while. But yes, we have
all of the all of those are
funded and are ready to go from
a funding standpoint. Again, can
can congratulations the nice
nice item for us to go into the
holiday with thank you MADAM
Chair. Thank you vice chair
kahina please. Um, first off,
congratulations, owens, on your
anniversary. Sean, I'm glad that
you've been with us for ten
years, and thank you for all
your work in these past ten
years. Um I. I loved seeing the
14 numbers. I'm an avid 14 and
14 are specific writer, so it
was great to see all the numbers
there. Um, I did have a question
on a lot of our red lines tend
to be in on commercial corridors
and so a lot of community
members there often cite that
the red lanes are impacting
business and they've seen a
decrease in business activity
and a lot of, you know,
vacancies arising. And there's
usually this like argument that
there's a causality between in
redlands and business. S so I
just was wondering if you all
have done some analysis on that
and if you do want to take some
time to share, if you have done
some analysis on that, what that
has resulted in, we've done some
analysis, you know, tax tax
numbers are a little bit lagging
behind. You actual
implementation and ridership
numbers and things like that.
But we have looked, for example,
on the l, we had a lot of
reports of people saying that
their business was was lower. So
we looked at business close
rates. We also looked at overall
tax revenue because it's been
long enough now that we've that
we've got some numbers is
actually the close rates on
taraval were less than the city
as a whole you know even though
of course to those individual
businesses that that was still
impactful and tax rates were
about about what we were seeing
on citywide. So you know, we
didn't see any any cause
causation there. But know that's
just one corridor we got. We got
to continue to look at that. And
that's one of the things, you
know, I talked about in a couple
of months. It's technically
march that muni returns ten. But
sometime in this fiscal year,
we're hoping to get before or
after project put together.
Looking back at the last ten
years of muni forward, both from
a benefit and also lessons
learned and standpoint. And that
will include a look at tax
numbers on on those major
corridors. So we do we do hope
within the next year to have
something out that that speaks
to that directly. I would
definitely encourage that
analysis to occur in the mission
district specifically because I
do think that a lot of the
narrative out there that there
is this causality between
redlands and business activity,
reduced business activity along
commercial corridors, creates
this fear factor for a lot of
folks. And implementing redlands
in their respect of
neighborhoods. So I think it's a
worthwhile effort to just, you
know, see if there's any truth
to that. And what we can do to
support business as if that is,
in fact an impact that we're
having. Um the other piece I was
going to touch on is as a avid
14, our writer, um, there is a
lot of double parking in the
mission district and so I do
wonder, you know, when we do
have these dedicated lanes, um,
we don't oftentimes have
capacity to, you know, have
enforcement and ensure that
they're actually clear for, for
our busses to pass through. And
so I just wanted to see like
what work effort your team is
thinking about to, to you know,
address that challenge. If
you're seeing that as a as a
huge challenge or not. And yeah,
just get your thoughts on that.
We are and cathy one of my one
of my staff is here is put
together a really great program
for that very for that very
issue. We're looking at a couple
of different things, both
education wise. So we've got
some new stickers that are going
on the backs of busses that say
cameron force that will be going
up and down basically on every
bus in our system. Of course,
only only actually is where
there's transit lanes, but also
cape brian's great work to get,
you know, camera enforcement on
our transit lanes themselves. It
used to be only double parking.
It's moving into, you know,
actually vehicles blocking the
transit lane and then we you
know, we are also working with
the pco, sean mccormick and his
group to make that a little bit
more of an upgrade. The
technology and make it a little
bit more of a easier process.
Right now we have two pco's that
sit in a small room and review
tape all day long and where
we're seeing double parking not
the not the most efficient way
to do things. So with the new
cameras that we're getting,
we're in the test period right
now on these new cameras and it
takes pictures so the pco's can
go right to the spot where the
camera thinks somebody was
violating the red lane. And then
the pco pco's actually make the
call. If it's if it if it did or
didn't, because the camera can
pick up some other stuff. But
but that's going to greatly
reduce the amount of time and
effort that it takes to give
out, give out those those
tickets. Yeah I'm not
encouraging a lot of tickets out
there, but I just want to make
sure that, you know, there
functioning as as we're
designing and it is interesting
that you know most of the
tickets that we give you know, I
we have sean follow up with the
exact number but a high
percentage of those numbers are
are associated with repeat
offenders and it's groups or
people that you know don't don't
seem to mind if they get a
ticket or or whatnot. You know
delivery trucks you know fedex
type things versus, you know,
the individuals usually with an
individual, we ticket them once
and we don't see that much
repeat issues there. So thank
you for that. The other thing I
would love to see in a future
for presentation is the operator
perspective on how these
different, uh, treatments are
actually functioning from them,
from like their, their
experience out. And I bring up
the fortuner again, avid writer
and also I had the opportunity
to speak to some operators there
and they're like, I was like,
well, so how effective is this
red line here? They're like,
yeah, it's hit or MISS Because
there's tons of cars in the
middle of the lane, so it
doesn't really, you know, you
still have to swerve and you
still have to do all these
things. So we'd love to see
their perspective on like how
the implementation is working
out and what they're seeing
from, you know, any areas of
improvement that they would see
from their perspective. Again,
they're the ones that are
actively on these lanes. So we'd
love to see what they have to
say about it. Yeah that's great.
We, you know, we meet with them
once a month at division one
safety meetings. So we get a lot
of that feedback as well. But we
should package it and make sure
we get. Thank you. Sounds good.
Thank you. Yeah, I just want to
thank you for sharing this sort
of progression of where we've
been and also just where we're
going. I really, really love the
vision slide because it helps
people to understand what all
these little pieces kind of add
up to this bigger, bigger vision
. So I think the only question I
have for you is really just
like, how, how what's it going
to take? How far are we from
realizing this, this vision? And
what are sort of the big what
are the big barriers? Yeah,
there's a lot of barriers from
technology. You know, signal
that's one of the reasons that
we want to look at some of our
international peers to figure
out how better how we can modify
how we do our signal timing to
better take advantage of, of
that. You know, when we when you
look at delay for on average on
a corridor, you know, you get
like 10, 12% of signal delay.
Another, you know, 3 to 5% used
to be crowding. But now that
we've we do all board boarding
and that's really helped reduce
the dwell time delay. But then
just the random like congestion
and like we were talking about
just the competing for space
with loading and with no, you
know, just double parking and
people trying to trying to find
parking spots and bike lanes
and, you know, pedestrian
scrambles all those things eat
into the travel time. So I the
vision is laid out there because
you've got to have a vision. If
we can ever get to that vision.
There's a lot of both. I think
policy of obstacles as well as
technology obstacles to get
there. But I think laying out
the vision helps us start
knocking off some of those and
finding solutions to some of
those issues. And that's why
it's kind of a longer term
vision versus a shorter term, a
shorter term reality. So we're
going to we're going to keep
bringing you stuff and hopefully
we can we can keep pushing the
envelope and eventually get
there. Yeah. And just thank you.
This was this was so
instructive. Just looking at
this like 12 corridors is two
thirds of all of our ridership
that it's sort of this
interesting corollary to of
course, the vision zero high
injury network, where it's just
like a small percentage, right.
Covers a huge part of the
challenge. So I feel like we
should all have those 12 lines
memorized. I don't know which
ones they are, but that's really
, really helpful to focus on.
Focus us in on sort of where the
majority of our ridership is
taking place. Okay. Are there
any other questions from
colleagues on the presentation?
If none, we'll go to public
comment. Please for anyone in
the room. My board members. Luke
bornheimer first, I just want to
thank michael, sean, julie,
director tomlin for all their
work on muni forward. It's, it's
really great to see and I think
riders really appreciate it and
it helps move our city towards a
more sustainable future. Um I
have a few notes. It would be
great to see more quick billed
bus boarding islands. I know
that takes funding, but seeing
those for example, like along
the 22 on fillmore I think would
really help to speed up the 22
and also discourage people from
driving on fillmore and getting
in the way of the 20 to be great
to see that across the city and
I think voters would support
that because it would make the
bus move faster, signal timing.
It would be great to see it on
both holding green lights and
preemption. I was on the van the
other day, got caught at a red
light kind of unnecessarily.
There's no bus stop there, so
it'd be great to see those
improvements made at brt and on
the rest of the transit only
lanes, there was talk about
enforcement. It would be great
to see separation of the transit
only lanes. So right now it's a
lot of just like good faith you
know it's either red paint or
white paint. It'd be great to
see posts curbs. We have bus
lane curbs or even diverters at
certain intersections to just
get people off of the streets
right now it's just too much
good faith and people are just
not following the rules,
including on mission. As far as
camera enforcement, I think sean
was alluding to ab 917 it would
be great to see that ramped up,
but definitely infrastructure is
needed. And then as far as the
business impacts, it'd be great
to see the agency look to new
york city. New york city has
done a lot of stuff around
transit only lanes, and maybe
they've done a bunch of business
impact studies. Not that san
franciscans always like to
believe other cities. And then
as far as safety, I think
increased ridership is also
great for safety. And so this
would encourage that. And
finally, I think I would
encourage the agency to lean on
prop j supporters. Prop j prop l
supporters are really correlated
and I think we can use those
folks to pass measures. Thank
you. Any other commenters in the
room? Okay. Please go to remote
at this time. We'll move to
remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator our first
speaker, this is herbert weiner.
One elephant in the room is the
need for more expansion of the
fleet. You need a net addition
of vehicles, whether they be in
the undergrad and or on the
surface because this is a
growing popular option with
growing needs. When you have
more vehicles, you have more
frequency of service. And I
think a lot of the money is
really being wasted on the
structural improvements like
eliminating bus stops and other
other things like that where you
if you had more busses, you
would have more frequency of
transportation. There would be
less crowding and it would be a
much more efficient service and
you could do it at the same cost
as the as removing bus stops and
making all these alterations. So
you must take this into
consideration. Other wise it
will perennially have the same
problem. Thank you. Thank you.
Next speaker. Good evening.
Board this is cyrus hall. I'm
calling in today representing a
faster, safer gary we recently
fought for the approval of the
gary boulevard improvement
project and we want to thank the
agency for quickly following
through and delivering the
project on a tight timeline on
the new transit lane will help
transit riders for many years to
come and we're excited to see
the pedestrian improvements
continue to develop. I want to
emphasize slide three somewhat
in opposition to the last caller
and staff's presentation on
congestion, increasing operation
costs and the opportunity we
have to paint more streets red
is a relatively cheap option to
provide wide benefits for riders
and is going to save on
operational costs associated
with running the same frequency
of service. This allows us to
make maximum use of our limited
operating budget additional
steps to speed up the deployment
of red lane should be pursued if
available. I also want to note
that while quick builds have
been very successful for the
agency and muni, ford has been a
successful program. Project
integration with other city
departments can be a struggle
and is a point for continued
improvement on gary. Other
agencies were unable and unready
to adjust the positioning of the
seated covered bus stops,
leaving riders unsure where to
board busses. This was also a
critical part of getting signal
timings right. Further
improvement and cross
cross-department coordination is
vital as we accelerate these
projects and I encourage the
board and the agency to continue
to investigate how we can better
integrate in terms of timing and
delivery. Thank you. Thank you.
No additional speakers. Thank
you, secretary silva. We will
now close public comment. Can
you please call the next item?
Very good places you on. Item
number 13 present motion and
discussion regarding the ocean
view transit and safety project.
Okay good afternoon, directors.
Once again, michael rhodes,
transit priority manager for
sfmta and today I'm giving an
informational update on the
ocean view transit and safety
project, which is part of the
muni forward program. And we
hope to bring the final project
proposal for you for your
consideration in JANUARY. But
today we'll be sharing a preview
of what's included and seeking
your feedback and direction as
we seek to finalize the
proposals. We don't usually
bring an informational item like
this prior to approval, but this
project has had a very community
driven approach to, you know,
design from the very start. And
we want to make sure we have
time to work through any
remaining design and outreach
questions while also getting
your input as we head towards
the final stage of planning. So
the ocean view, transit and
safety project is moving
forward. Capital project on the
line and the ocean view that
aims to improve reliability.
Customer experience,
accessibility and traffic safety
as well. All the project area is
the line in the ocean view
neighborhood, so that's
basically from the intersection
of 19th avenue and uniprocessor
boulevard down to balboa park
station along the so long
streets like san jose avenue,
broad street, orizaba randolph
and a section of 19th avenue,
not the state highway section of
19th avenue, but the section
that's in the ocean view
neighborhood. And the project
does not look at sections of the
line outside of the ocean view
like parkmerced or sf state or
stonestown or west portal
avenue. These areas will be
evaluated separately through the
muni metro modernization study.
The project would benefit 18,000
daily riders on the ocean view
and it supports the muni service
equity strategy. Since the mta
is an equity strategy line and
the ocean view neighborhood is
an equity strategy neighborhood.
So broadly speaking, there's
sort of three main challenges
that the ocean view, the ocean
view corridor faces within the
neighborhood of the ocean view.
There's sort of reliability and
customer experience issues. So
there's frequent stop signs.
There's a lot of flag stops or
stops that don't have any kind
of boarding facilities. There
are closely spaced stops in some
cases and just general
congestion in some locations
that can add to the delay. And
in general, transit stops in
many cases, they basically lack
sort of basic amenities in terms
of safety. The project area is
on the city's high injury
network. Many stops require
riders to board in the street,
as I mentioned, and ten people
have been hit in the past five
years, just sort of getting off
the train. So not not to mention
all the other pedestrian
injuries. That's that's people
stepping off the train. As far
as accessibility, there are long
gaps on this corridor still
between wheelchair accessible
stops. As I mentioned earlier,
we've sought to bring in a very
community driven approach to
outreach on this project. So
starting in spring summer of
2022, we began an initial public
outreach phase that was really
sort of a community listening
tour. There were no proposals
yet at this stage. We just went
out to the community and we met
residents, riders and merchants.
Where they're at. We held a
survey to identify community
priorities for addressing
transportation issues. Along the
corridor. We heard from about
270 survey respondents and a
majority of the people we heard
from were people of color. And
23% of the responses that we got
were provided in chinese in
summer and fall of 2022. We
shared initial high level
concepts that sought to address
the top priorities that people
had identified in the first
phase of outreach. So these
weren't detailed proposals, but
rather kind of general concepts
for where we could do things
like improve safety at stops or
improve travel time through stop
spacing changes, for instance.
But it's not sort of down to the
foot level. Here's exactly where
boarding island might be or how
long it might be in spring of
this year, we shared the first
round of detailed proposals
based on feedback we'd heard
during the conceptual phase, and
we gathered more public feedback
to further refine the proposals
that we presented. And at this
stage people could see exactly
how transit, how long a transit
bulb might be. For instance, or
exactly where we might be
proposing crosswalks with
continental striping or all the
kind of fine details came out at
that point. And finally this
summer, most recently in fall,
we've shared revised proposals
again that you know, had had
feedback incorporated from that
last round again. And we held a
public hearing and we briefed
stakeholders to gather
additional feedback. So there's
been multiple rounds and really
even the first round reflected
priorities that we'd identified
through kind of an open
listening tour of the community.
And now we're just about ready
to bring a proposal to the mta
board for approval and review.
But as I mentioned earlier,
there's at least one key
location where we're continuing
to work with community members
to finalize the design. And
here's what we've heard so far
throughout the outreach process.
During the initial listening
tour, the number one thing we
heard from survey respondents is
that muni service should be
faster and more reliable,
consistent with the survey
results, we saw citywide that
was the priority for responses
here to that was about two
thirds of responses. Put that as
their top priority and a quarter
of respondents also said their
top issue was that transit stops
don't feel safe for pedestrians
or that they lack basic
accessibility and, you know,
other basic amenities. We also
heard consistently that there
are issues with speeding on san
jose avenue, kind of similar to
the j church portion of san jose
avenue. We heard that small
businesses and other community
institutions need parking and
loading options for people to
access the corridor. And we
heard that stunt driving is a
problem at times. On randolph
and broad. Not typically
something we seek to address
with muni forward, but we were
listening and we heard that that
was one of the community issues
that was identified as we began
to share our initial concepts,
we did hear feedback that
removing train stops at some
locations would specifically
orizaba and broad would affect a
future access to a future
library location. That's
proposed there. So we said,
okay, we're going to revise that
to take that into account. What
we heard concerns that proposed
traffic signals could lead to
speeding. We also heard some
additional feedback specific to
the transit stop near the
salvation army. First nation
corps location on 19th avenue
that I'll speak to a little bit
more later on and I'll speak to
some of the changes that we made
based on the feedback a little
later in the presentation on. So
here's a summary of what we're
proposing with the current
proposal. Transit lanes on san
jose avenue from broad to
niagara to reduce speeding and
to improve transit reliability,
there's a lot of excess roadway
capacity right now. So it's
really as much as anything kind
of a road diet benefit. There
are proposed wider sidewalks and
boarding islands at 15 train
stops along the corridor to
provide a safer loading
experience. As we're proposing
wheelchair accessible ramps at
four stops to enhance
accessibility, we're proposing
transit, stop consolidation at
three locations to reduce, delay
and create more even regular
stop spacing. We're also
proposing safety elements like
bulb outs, refuge islands, stop
signs, daylighting continental
crosswalks and other features to
just generally improve walking
safety on this corridor. So this
map summarizes the parking
changes that would result from
the project improvement. It's as
you can see, there would be 75
spaces removed in total across
the corridor, which represents
about 6% of the overall parking
supply within a block of the
project area, about 94% of
spaces would be retained. Most
of this parking removal is
directly tied to safety
improvements. That is pretty
much all of them. As the table
at the bottom here kind of
shows, you can list out what the
benefit of each element is and
how many spaces that would
require removing to improve
safety or accessibility or
whatever the benefit is. And
actually the only element that's
pure transit reliability is stop
consolidation, which actually
increases the parking supply. So
as you can see, it's a safety
and reliability that's sort of
accounts for the lion's share of
the changes in parking. And one
other important note is that the
majority of parking changes or
impacts are concentrated at sort
of outside of the commercial
core of the of the project area.
So the greatest removal is at
the ends of the project area and
at the broad san jose
intersection, which these are
generally not the commercial
hubs of, of this project area,
although there are still some
key parking needs, especially on
the 19th avenue section and some
other locations. So to help
mitigate the parking impacts, we
did a curb use survey with
merchants that helped us
identify solution such as
loading zones that would help
ensure businesses and other
institutions have their needs
met for parking and loading.
We've also proposed to add back
parking through angled parking
and other measures wherever
feasible near the project area.
Community feedback has shaped
the project in many ways, both
in terms of the original
concepts that we presented and
in the revisions that we've made
over the past year and more. So
first, we've sought to keep
parking wherever possible. This
has meant proposing shorter
transit bulbs in some cases as
long as passengers won't be
stepping into an active travel
lane. So we might propose a
shorter transit bulb as long as
it's a parking lane there
instead of a travel lane, but
still trying to at least cover
the first car of the train.
We've proposed special
intersection treatments to help
reduce stunt driving at randolph
on randolph at head in victoria.
We've implemented or we're
proposing traffic signal timing
that would maximize safety for
people walking and we're
considering making the two
proposed signals all red, kind
of flashing all red at night. So
they basically function as stop
signs when there's not as much
transit service running and when
there's not as much traffic. And
you might see more issues with
speeding. We're also keeping and
upgrading transit stops at
orizaba broad and bright
randolph that were originally
proposed for consolidation and
we also have adjusted some of
the proposed stop locations to
better serve key community
institutions and to preserve
parking where it's needed the
most by businesses, especially
along 19th avenue. We are
specifically reducing the
transit bulb length that's
proposed near the buckman center
and. Providing a passenger
loading zone there to sort of
better meet their needs. That
came up during the outreach
process and we're also looking
to accommodate loading at the
salvation all nation core
location while upgrading the
stops as is currently proposed.
So we've made several other
changes to the project, adding
bulbs, more bulbs and adding
other pedestrian safety
features. Several other changes.
I won't list all of them, but
just to know that that project
has evolved quite a bit through
the outreach process. So just
briefly, just we'll mention that
the project does, in addition to
the in addition to sort of basic
transport features, we are
looking to incorporate safety
enhancements like and customer
experience enhancements. This
this could be things like
lighting the lighting pilot that
sean mentioned, which will help
us improve the sense of
security. It stops potentially
incorporating landscaping,
seating and shelters as other
elements will ensure that the
project meets a broader range of
community needs. And in terms of
the details of those proposals,
that's something we will work
out in close collaboration with
community during the detailed
design phase of the project in
addition to the overview that I
mentioned, I wanted to highlight
three key locations where we're
proposing the most extensive
upgrades on the corridor. So
first, this is the intersection
of broad and san jose. We heard
a lot of feedback about this
intersection during the
listening tour phase of our
project outreach. The goal of
this proposal, this intersection
is to transfer from this
intersection from a freeway
style off ramp to more of a
walking friendly design. We're
proposing new pedestrian bulbs
and refuge islands to help
reduce crossing distances and
slow traffic. We're also
proposing a new stop sign for
the northbound san jose avenue
direction to aid pedestrians and
also trains because trains
actually have to stop and
oncoming traffic doesn't right
now. So we're looking to correct
that by making it a four way
stop sign here. At the end
result should be a great
improvement overall for safety
here. Another key location is at
the terminal, stops on san jose
near geneva avenue, right by the
balboa park station. This
intersection has been the
subject of planning and studies
for years and has been a
community priority for upgrades
for a long, long time. We know
and as you can see in the photos
here, the existing stops lack
safe boarding areas for, you
know, all the train doors for
the last outbound stop and for
some of the train doors for the
inbound stop. In addition, the
existing wheelchair accessible
stops here are one of them, is
sort of very inconveniently
located. And the other
direction, it's not reliable.
It's mechanical and it breaks
down all the time. So we're
looking to provide a more
convenient and reliable
wheelchair ramp option as well.
So it's been quite a design
challenge to fit all of the
features that we want to fit
into this intersection and it's
a busy, constrained zone, but
this proposal should meet those
needs, we think and greatly
improve conditions for people
accessing the line. And that is
especially important we think
right now because there's a
brand new affordable housing
development that just is sort of
being completed right now or
just completed on san jose at
this intersection at the
southwest corner of geneva. So
this these stops are really
going to better serve that new
community and all the existing
riders there. So finally, along
the 19th avenue section of the
project area, the west end of
the project corridor, just
before sarah, sarah, we're
seeking to address another of
the most challenging issues with
the current line service. So as
you can see in the photo here,
the existing inbound 19th avenue
stop at sarah does not have a
boarding platform at all and
passengers are boarding right
into a lane of traffic, not just
a parking lane, but an active
turn lane for vehicles. So
drivers there are eager to get
through the traffic signal and
get onto the state highway
portion of 19th avenue up ahead
or onto junipero serra
boulevard. And people have been
hit here. And we've heard from
riders and muni operators that
improvements are urgently,
urgently needed. The outbound
stop also lacks a boarding
island. People board into a
parking lane. So to address
these issues, we're proposing to
relocate the stops a block to
the south and upgrade them with
transit boarding islands. A bike
lane would also be included
since this part of 19th avenue
is a bike route that connects
the two sf state and to daly
city, bart and due to the very
limited geometry and the heavy
traffic kind of at the existing
stop locations, it wasn't
possible to upgrade the stops in
their existing locations. So
we've sought to keep them as
close to the original locations
as possible while having the
room to do these upgrades. We're
also proposing to include
wheelchair accessible ramps to
help fill a lengthy gap in the
accessible stops right here. And
we've you know, we've heard a
lot of support and a lot of
urgency for upgrading the
inbound stop in particular. But
we've also heard concerns about
some of the potential parking
impacts with this specific
proposals, especially the
relocation of the inbound stop
to block south or so given the
location of driveways and the
short blocks here and other
challenges, we're pretty limited
in where we could place this
upgraded inbound stop in
particular. But we did want to
share some of the feedback we've
heard with the board and provide
an opportunity for discussion on
and just provide, provide you a
little bit of an update on the
different options and trade offs
and a little bit of what we're
looking at with the different
proposals. So on this slide,
we're showing three potential
designs for the inbound stop on
19th avenue. First, there's the
current proposal, which we
already saw that would place the
stop immediately in front of the
salvation army on 19th avenue,
just south of sergeant street.
So that's on the left of the
three proposals there. This
salvation army location is a
church and a service provider.
It's not a store, but it you
know, it has a lot of active
services throughout the week.
And our proposal includes adding
loading zones to meet the sort
of drop off and access needs.
But it does put a boarding
island sort of throughout out
most of the length of their
street frontage on that block.
They you know, the folks at
salvation army have shared
concerns about having a transit
stop in front of their
facilities in general. And we've
also concerns about losing most
of the parking on their block.
They do have a dedicated parking
lot to the north of sergeant on
19th avenue, but they've noted
that they do have pretty
extensive parking demand at
times during services and the
services that they provide.
Under the first proposal, eight
out of nine parking spaces on
that block would be removed and
one blue zone accessible parking
space would be retained on the
south end. Alternatively there's
sort of two other variants we
could shorten the boarding
island to be the length of one
car instead of a two car train.
Technically, the passengers in
the second car would step off
into a parking lane, not a
travel lane. But the lane here
is pretty wide. So, you know,
there's some risk of a car bike
kind of trying to squeeze past.
If we don't have the full length
island here, it's still a huge
improvement over the current
location where you're stepping
off into an active travel lane,
of course. And since the current
location is two lanes, this
one's one. It's an improvement
in this scenario, the wheelchair
stop would have to be located
separately, probably north of
beverly, and this would preserve
for two five parking spaces
instead of just one on the
block. And finally, on the
right, there's an option where
we don't build any boarding
island at the new stop location.
This is the least good in terms
of safety and accessibility,
although it's certainly still a
major improvement over the
current stop. We'd still
daylight the front of the stop,
so there would be some parking
removal, but just about one
space and we really wouldn't
recommend this design given the
trade offs for safety and
accessibility that it entails,
especially given the resolution
telling us to eliminate the
treatment of flag stops. But we
did want to share this option
since it does have the least
parking impact. And finally, we
we've also been in discussion
with salvation army
representatives about just in
the last few days about this
concept of could we move the
stop farther south and maybe
sort of block the next
intersection with the train stop
and have a short boarding island
? The second car would actually
be hanging out into the
monticello intersection. So we
don't really recommend that that
necessarily unless we completely
shut down monticello. And
there's sort of circulation
concerns with doing that and
feel liability questions. But we
did want to share that. That was
something that has been brought
up. So we're sharing all of this
detail to hopefully get the
board's kind of high level
feedback and direction, maybe
not an inch by inch discussion
about it, but at least kind of
at the high level of how you
think we should approach this
and what to prioritize near this
intersection ahead of bringing
this back to you. Hopefully for
a final vote in JANUARY for the
whole project. But in the
meantime, we will be continuing
to work closely with salvation
army folks and try to
accommodate their needs as best
as possible in this proposal,
but instead of just waiting till
JANUARY, we did want to share an
update and sort of get at least
your kind of high level feedback
on this. So wrapping up or the
next steps look like today,
informational item giving you
this update outreach continues
JANUARY bringing this project
for a vote. Hopefully spring
quick build of the initial
improvements, detailed design
over the next couple of years
and then full construction in
2026 to 2028. But again, trying
to get many of the benefits as
soon as this spring, this is the
package that you will be voting
on essentially in the coming
months. And you know, that's
that's pretty much the update.
Thank you, directors. We're
happy to answer any questions
today. We look forward to
getting your input on the
project and work towards work
towards finalizing this last key
piece of the proposed design.
Thank you so much. Vice chair
kahina. Um, I'm excited about
this project for many reasons. I
think this is a commercial
corridor that has really wanted
this level of investment for a
long period of time and it's so
great to be able to be to serve
on this board and be in a place,
in a position to be able to give
this sort of investment to this
neighborhood that desperately
needs it just for context, for
my colleagues to better
understand what this corridor is
like and some of the challenges
that it has had. It is a
corridor that has pockets of
commercial activity throughout
it. It's not a commercial
corridor that, you know, it's
not as robust as ocean avenue or
or the mission street excelsior
corridor, but it is one that has
had a lot of I would say,
community power to really
activate it for a long period of
time. And there are certain
intersections that have had a
lot of intervention from
infested neighborhoods, from
other different departments in
the city to support it and to
make sure that beautification
projects happen and all these
different things. So. There's a
couple of things that I'm noting
in this particular project that
I have questions about. Some are
around the bookends. So on the
geneva to san jose side,
michael's right. There's a new
development there that just went
up. It's now the ribbon cutting
ceremony happened. It's up and
running and it's a beautiful
sight. Right? 100% affordable
housing, a huge collaboration
with bart occurred in that space
to improve the bart plaza
location. Um it is a place where
a lot of folks, you know, start
their, you know, their trips on
bart and oftentimes, you know, a
lot of folks there isn't a
parking structure around there
so and this neighborhood is very
car centric. And so a lot of
folks do park adjacent or near
the balboa park station to drop
their cars off and then be able
to take transit from there. Um,
so I see the loss of parking
here and it gives me a little
bit of a concern on I'm just to
knowing how the community uses
this space and knowing how they
use the parking facilities that
are currently there right now.
But I agree it is a design
challenge. It's a bit of a mess
there for many reasons. Um, and
it is challenging for transit
riders to be able to take to
board the muni, to board muni
and whether it's the bus or a
train, it's been challenging for
some time. Um, so I'm curious to
see like what the conversation
has been with the community on
the loss of parking there and,
and really trying to understand
what the discussion has been in
some of the solutions that have
popped up in that particular
section in just again, I just
know that a lot of folks really
park and ride in that that area.
And that's how they use it. So
I'm curious about that. The
other part that I'm just super
enthusiastic about is the broad
san jose interchange there,
because I do again, that's
another tricky intersection and
I'm glad that there's going to
be a four way stop there. It's
been needed for some time. So I
think that's great. Um I am
interested in understanding you
mentioned like this, this
project could be an opportunity
to also integrate some public
realm improvements. I'm
wondering if those are funded in
the project or if this is
something where you'd have to
collaborate with another
department or just want to
understand that piece of it
because there have like what I
don't want folks to members of
the community to expect to see
public realm improvements as
part of the project and then get
disappoint when we're just, you
know, implementing some of our
infrastructure improvements
around transit. So that piece as
well. But yes, if you could
answer to those three questions
as specifically around the
geneva san jose intersection,
the public realm improvements
and just understanding a little
bit more on what the appetite
has been on from the community
on the loss of parking, because
I know that's that's something
that this community in
particular is going to feel
really, really strongly against.
Yeah thank you, director. So in
terms of the geneva san jose
area overall, we've heard pretty
strong support for the
improvements. I think there's an
understanding that excuse me,
that, you know, it's just an
area where there's been this
long standing need and the
parking impact is significant at
that location. But I think
everything we've heard working
with community members there has
been overall supportive. We have
designed it in a way that
provides the key benefits with
as little parking impact as you
can manage. And even some of the
adjustments to it preserve more
of the parking that's closest to
balboa park station, just
through sort of reconfigure ing
some of the design at the same
time, those changes have
probably benefited the project
overall. So I think luckily we
were able to find a design that
is best from an accessibility
standpoint, best from a transit
rider standpoint and does the
least to remove parking. But
there's no avoiding that there,
is there is, you know,
significant amount of parking
impact. But I would say we have
not at that particular location,
heard a great deal of concern.
We've heard it more kind of
right in front of merchant
locations along the corridor in
general, as far as the public
realm improvements, I think some
basic public realm improvements
should be able to be addressed
within the project. The lighting
pilot that I mentioned is funded
through a separate a separate
pilot program at the same time,
if we get into detail design and
we're having community
conversations where people want
things that are beyond what we
can fund, then I think we would
take initiative as a project to
do everything we can to try to
make that happen. But it
probably l taraval is a good
example of the kind of basic
sort of landscaping customer
experience elements that we've
been able to incorporate into
the first phase of that. And it
looks great if you've been out
to taraval street, the boarding
islands are not just a slabs of
concrete. There architecturally
nice and have some landscaping
elements. So at a minimum, I
think that level would be
something we can incorporate
with the current budget. Then a
follow up question I had because
because again, this corridor has
pockets of commercial activity
and I understand that we're
going to integrate transit only
lanes as part of the project.
Have there been some strong
feelings from the community
about opposing the transit only
lanes along the commercial
corridor or like just if you can
give me a sense of what the
community response has been,
that'd be great. Sure. Yeah. So
the transit lanes are only
proposed on san jose avenue,
which in this segment is like
100% residential all so we
really haven't had any concern
about it. It's such a low volume
street for the width of the
street. Left turns are still
allowed. There's no kind of
business impact or business
access issues, so it, you know,
it can be a it can be something
that's a point of discussion
with projects. But in this case,
it has not been a concern that
we've heard. Okay. And in terms
of I hear you wanting guidance
from us on the three different
options that you have there. And
I, I would honestly defer to
your work with the community to
understand what's best for folks
there. Um, I think it's
important to try to there are a
lot of seniors in this
neighborhood as well. And so I,
I do want to prioritize the
resources that ensure that they
still have close proximity to a
lot of the resources along the
corridor. And it seems like this
particular intersection is one
of those that converge a lot of
different resource hubs for
folks. And so we'll defer to
staff and community to work it
out. And so I but I, I hope that
in the discussions, um, we do
communicate to the community how
important it is for seniors to
also to safely board the transit
as well. Um, and that that's not
lost in the discussion. So
that's, I guess it's not really
a lot of clear direction on it,
but just wanted to give you my,
my sense of how you all should
tackle it. Thank you. Vice chair
karina, director. So, and kensi,
I see your hands are raised
also. So we have a number of
members of the public who would
like to comment on this item. So
if that's okay with you, I'd
like to go to public comment
now, hear from the public, and
then we can have further
discussion of the board. Please
please go ahead and approach the
podium. If you'd like to comment
on this item. Oh, good evening,
MADAM Chair and mta directors.
my name is jeannie tam. I have
been a member of the salvation
army church for 35 years and I
am currently on the church corps
council and I have with me we
had our senior pastor who had to
leave and we have our assistant
pastor and we have some members
here as you could tell, we're
not board meeting savvy because
we've been here since 1:00, even
though we knew our agenda was
last. So our I understand that
the proposal proposal is to do a
accommodate two different stops
near us and to make that into
one right in front of our church
entrance is it's literally just
a few yards away from our front
door. We are called td center
for worship and service. We are
registered 150 member church
wednesday evenings, sunday
mornings we gather, and it's
already at parking challenge for
us on the picture looked like
they are partial cross street
looked much bigger. It's only
ten spots a parcel so we already
have to look for scatter to look
for other parking spots within
the streets. And we call our
service service center because
we service our our local low
income families. We serve as
weekly food pantry where 70
people, individuals line up to
pick up their groceries and we
have clothing drive on
wednesdays. We have women coming
to pick up their clothes from
our room full of clothing. At
and seasonal programs like
summer bible school programs for
youth, youth. And we have back
to school backpack handing out
backpacks an angel tree and
christmas and we're they pick up
we so as you can see we can we
have constant flow of people
coming in to register and sign
up for things. We have constant
flow of loading, unloading
supplies. So at our front door
entrance is the primary access
pause for one minute. That is
your time. However, are you
speaking on behalf of a number
of. Yes, I am. There's only
maybe two people behind me who's
going to speak. Is that all
right? If we allow additional
time, if she's speaking on
behalf of other people? If you
have, I'm almost done. Yeah. If
you have questions for the
speaker, she can respond to any.
Okay okay. So taking away even a
small percentage of parking will
really have huge impact for our
daily operation. And we do
understand and appreciate the
objective of this project, which
for the safety and writing
enhanced ridership enhancement.
However we and we're grateful
for these additional alternate
lives, but we would please would
like to ask if you could
possibly move the stop to any
other block or and again, it's
literally an important
impairment of our daily
operations loading, unloading
passengers. We do have many few
handicapped persons who have to
really get off really in front
of our door instead of walking
halfway. Block thank you for
your time. Thank you. Are there
additional speakers in the room
on this item? Please go ahead.
Good evening. Board my name is
steve tam. I'm also with the san
francisco all-nations core. I
just wanted to elaborate that
additionally to what jeannie had
said. Right. You know, we have a
service. You know, we have a lot
of numbers. Right. But what she
didn't say is that the access to
our block right in that block,
if you compare to all other
blocks, we have a continuous
block on our side and as well as
on the other side. On the other,
on the opposite side of the
street there aren't small spaces
that you can never park a car,
right? That's why you've got ten
plus eight and then looks like
another two based off of their
current. That's 20 spaces, right
? That makes up over 26% of what
they just indicated as the 75,
75 spaces throughout the whole
line. Right. So that's a major
impact on us, right. But having
access for the parents to drop
off their youth or, you know,
just for people have access,
handicap access challenge, we
need to have access on our side
of the street at a minimum.
Right. For their safety. So I
understand the stops that are
necessary for the passengers,
for the muni, but we also have
to consider the safety of the
community that comes to our
church for all the services and
other things. Right. So I did
notice that, you know, on the
powerpoint that we saw, there
was only the proposal alternate
one and two, alternative three,
which was shown just now, which
is showing the stop on the south
end of the stop. That would in
corrupt the monticello street.
That's a very low usage street.
Right and but you know because
our block is triangle, the two
sides are very you know angled
right having having a train stop
there also prevents people from
speeding down that hill. Right.
So you know, but the main point
is the criticality of just
maintaining our block on that
side of the street. Okay thank
you for your time. Thank you.
Additional speakers. Good
evening all for the directors.
And I am sorry you guys have to
stay late. My name is chong
park. I'm the pastor and I'm
talking about the, you know, we
have also a senior citizens over
there and the handicapped and
also children's. You guys have
to consider that if they want to
looking for safety, which is not
good front of the church and
parking not yes we do need
parking but mostly important
people who are able to walk.
Disability peoples. That's very
important to walk through the
think about it. You know,
eventually they cannot walk. And
especially I have a husband who
have a 23 years and straw hemi
paradise and he can walk and he
can get out and I have to take
him out. But he he loved to come
to church, you know, so I was
nearly abducted. So if they can
move to a different place, the
stop different place, which is
better also, they sierra and
which they have last accident I
also rejected the place because
the stop sign is too short you
know so that's why you know,
cars are so speed way to come to
19 to 1 one I guess I would one
that's the problem. Another
thing is that you know I've been
research the trend not many
people get out of their place
only 2 or 3 people I've been
such the seven days because of
this. And you know they bike
people. They don't have it. And
I want you guys nearly survey
again to move to another area to
the parking space please if you
can. Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you for your comment. Any
other speakers in the room on
this item? No additional
speakers. Okay please open the
remote comment at this time.
We'll move to remote public
comment not to exceed a time of
ten minutes. Members of the
public wishing to comment should
dial star three to enter the
queue. Each speaker will have
two minutes. Moderator first
speaker is evening board. This
is cyrus hall. I just want to
voice my strong support for the
ocean view transit and safety
project. I've reviewed this
project and communicated quite a
bit with the agency and while I
would love to have seen more two
car islands, I think the agency
has really made some some good
and difficult decisions around
balancing street geometries and
community use decisions. But
within that context, I want to
strongly urge the agency to
adopt the original proposal at
19th and randolph street, we do
not often get opportunities to
improve muni lines and passing
the opportunity to create a two
car island for riders would be
deeply unfortunate. Shortening
the island would force riders on
the second car to step into the
traffic lane. And while traffic
should be slowing, if a train is
in the stop, it would have to
wait as they would have to wait
for the train to clear. It still
adds risks and difficult for
riders removing the island
entirely is wholly unacceptable.
While we are struggling to make
progress on vision zero and we
must not MISS This opportunity
to remove a clear traffic hazard
for riders, we need to be
encouraging the use of public
transit, not continuing to
accept a car first mindset as a
city, many senior citizens
cannot drive. Children can't
drive many differently abled
people can't drive. And making
muni easier and convenient to
use is vital to serve those
riders. I also want to mention
that moving the wheelchair
accessible ramp would push
wheelchair users away from the
rest of waiting passengers,
increasing their perceptions of
risk while riding. It would also
make boarding and egress slower
as the m would have to stop
twice. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you. No
additional speakers. Okay. Thank
you, director. So please. Um.
Thank you for the presentations
and thank you for all these
public comments. I'd like to ask
to clarify just my understanding
of the extent of the scope of
the work here. Are you upgrading
the tracks as well. Director so
no. This project currently would
just be focused on the transit
reliability and pedestrian
safety elements. There's not
currently a plan to incorporate
track replacement as part of it.
Okay. Thank you. And then also,
did you check with other
agencies like our friends and
like, for example, puc, if there
will be also doing work along
this route? Great question. Yes
yes and yes, they are on broad
street and because of that, we
will be joining them for kind of
an early. We would if this is
approved, we would join them to
tie our work together. We'd
actually be accelerating that
section a little bit just to
make sure we don't MISS That
window to join them. So they're
doing some utility work on broad
that we would incorporate our
bulb work into. That's great. I
like I mean, I'm really this is
great to hear because learning
from our recent experiences, you
know, we should be really making
sure we are proactive into
reaching out to other agencies
to make sure that if we can, um,
if we can allow our schedule to
work with their so then it
provides minimum disrupt option
to our neighborhood and
communities will be better for
us. So I'm glad that your team
is doing that. So lastly, I have
one question I exactly where is
this church located? And yeah,
um, if I can pull up the
presentation again, the church
is located on 19th avenue. Hold
on a second. So it's located on
19th avenue, just east of
junipero serra. It's if you see
where that sign is that says new
stops with boarding islands and
wheelchair accessible ramps that
sort of call out box. That's
exactly the block where the
church is located or the
facility is located at occupies
that entire block, pretty much.
Oh, that's the salvation army
block. Yes. Okay, great. Thank
you. Thank you. Director hensley
. Thank you to the team for this
update in and seeking our
feedback. Um, during director
kina, as you know, more detailed
questions and I would defer to
her as she she has the deep
corridor knowledge and I am
particularly excited about the
accessing ability of the
accessibility improvements of
the boarding islands. Um, so to
that end, the one thing I will
do is sort of give high level
direction. I want my, my opinion
of it anyway, for your 19th
avenue proposal, um, I, I would
work with community of course.
And thank you to the members of
the church who came out today.
But I, I would. And I think
staff is going this direction
already, but I would not, not
not recommend doing option three
and working with community to
try to see if you can come to
some sort of agreement between
option one and two. I I concur
with the caller that I mean,
removal of the boarding island
did not doing the key stop would
be would be a step back on the
whole for this this project. So
I would support moving forward
with working with community to
hopefully come to an agreement
between options one and two.
Thank you chair. Thank. You.
Director hennessy. Director
kahina. Did you want to speak
again? Yeah, I just had a
clarifying question on the 19th
avenue proposal. Is there a
reason why we're removing
parking in front of the church
to accommodate the bike lane? Is
that. No, it's mostly to provide
the boarding platform. Otherwise
as people would step off the
train into a parking lane. And
it's such a wide travel lane too
that it's possible for vehicles
to drive between the train and
the park cars even though it's
not a second travel lane. So if
there weren't if this wasn't a
bike route, what we would be
proposing here is a bulb like
connected to the sidewalk, the
full length of the train car
probably. But because there's a
bike lane here, it's an island.
So the bikes can pass through as
well. And so this would be a
these are new stops that we're
proposing here. And the old
stops, it looks like, were
before randolph or I guess is it
north? North of randolph. Is
that right? That's right. So
there's currently a stop just
just south of jserra or just
east of jserra. It's like right
before 19th avenue turns onto
jserra. And that stop, you know,
there's a turn lane. There's
really nowhere to put a safe
boarding island or boarding
bulb. So that stop would go away
because there's really no way to
upgrade it. And then there is
another stop down at 19th avenue
where it intersects with
randolph that stop would also be
consolidated and into this new
stop at sargeant, which is in
front of the salvation army.
And, you know, even if we were
to keep the stop at 19th and
randolph it that would not serve
people kind of farther to the
north. And we've heard specific
feedback from folks who go to
the senior center which is which
is closer to this new stop
location that it's really
important to have a stop as
close as possible to that
facility and especially an
accessible stop. Okay. And so I
asked this not to say you have
it. I'm sure you have, but I
would really want staff to
consider or the team to consider
alternate placement of those
stops because it seems like I
like I understand at least
having like a loading zone there
for a lot of the seniors that
would access those services or
just something there. Right.
Because it seems like this
institution is serving folks
that have a wide range of
mobility issues and that having
some some placement there some
way for folks to at least drop
off, you know, a parent or
someone would would be critical
for them. So I just again, I
guess going back to my earlier
direction, work with the
community. But I think in the
many of options that you're
considering that go, I guess it
would be alternative for
alternative, a new alternative
if you all could explore a
different placement of the bus.
Sorry, of the loading zones or
the loading area. Sorry um, to
try to see if there's a way to
accommodate the needs of the
folks here. Um, again, not
saying you haven't done this
already, but I think we should
try to figure out a way to
balance the needs there a little
bit more. Well, and just to
clarify, any other location that
would serve the senior center
and be anywhere near the current
stop would have to block an
intersection on. There's just no
other street frontage that is
long enough to place a stop. So
I hear that direction. But if
that is direction from the
board, we would need to know
that that's also the direction
to consider blocking an
intersection. Correct? And when
I say work with the community, I
think it's the senior center
included in the mix as well,
because it does seem like we
have some competing priorities
within the community and that
needs to get sorted out as well.
So it's a tough position to be
in as staff to try to bridge
those those competing priorities
and try to find a solution. But
you all are very talented and I
know you're up for the challenge
. So I would encourage folks to
the team to try to bridge these
competing priorities and find a
mutual agreeable solution
between them.
So thank you for that. Um, we
have technically closed public
comment, but I know it's been a
long day, so. Sure, go ahead.
You've been here a long time. Go
ahead. What's up? So I just want
to make clear right, the current
proposal, I'm not sure. I just
want to make clear. Okay, so
option 1 or 2 deputy city
attorney is just not allowing.
That's right. Sorry. If you have
questions for the members of the
community, you MAY ask them. But
if the gentleman has already
spoken tonight, he does not get
another opportunity. Okay. Just
one comment. If maybe it's
better to speak to staff, you
could go into the hallway and
share it with staff or
something. The staff could could
hear from you directly. Yeah
okay. Um. Okay. I just wanted to
share one piece of feedback you
had asked us for a decision on
these three potential options.
Whenever we're faced with these
decisions, I just want to inform
any decision making with values.
So whichever to me is the safest
for pedestrians and transit
riders, whichever is the most in
lined with our transit first
policy and in support of our
transit riders and whichever is
the most accessible. So those
would be some of the values that
I would encourage falling back
on. To me, splitting up the
wheelchair accessible stop from
the regular stop seems very
bizarre. And I did want to
understand what what does this
mean in practice? Does this mean
that the train will stop and
then we'll stop again in very,
very nearby for any wheelchair
requiring passengers? Yes and
best practice is certainly to
have them joined. You have to
stop twice no matter what,
because you're always going to
stop at even if it's a join
boarding island, you're stopping
at the general loading area and
then you have to the train has
to inch up to get to the
boarding platform for wheelchair
users. But having them all in
one place is the most legible.
It feels safest because it's
been pointed out people don't
feel like they're kind of
isolated in their own location.
But it is something we
occasionally do. If splitting
stops for technical or other
reasons. Okay. Thank you. That's
that's the feedback I wanted to
share. Any other colleagues have
comments on this item? Okay it's
not a voting item, it's just
informational. So we'll go ahead
and adjourn the meeting and the
next meeting is NOVEMBER 28th
for the vision zero subcommittee
and DECEMBER fifth for this last
board meeting of the year. Thank
you all. Thank you.